--- PAGE 18 ---
your stress level, intensity level, and rate of adaptation in terms of overall
fitness. Recent advances in technology provide simple and noninvasive
methods for measuring 24-hour heart rates. Previously, 24-hour monitoring
was done only for medical reasons when a heart condition was suspected.
This usually involved wearing a Holter monitor and was performed
specifically on cardiac patients with the objective of detecting irregular
rhythms. Today, however, 24-hour monitoring can be used in athletics to
gauge recovery from training sessions, predict sickness, and ultimately
allow for real-time manipulation of training loads and sessions. Collecting
heart rate data over a 24-hour period allows one to detect very small, but
meaningful, changes in resting and exercise heart rates. Data that reveals
abnormal responses consequently allows both coach and athlete to
manipulate rest, recovery, and workload. We do this with the specific
objective of maximizing performance, minimizing injury, optimizing rest,
and ensuring adequate recovery during exercise sessions such as interval
workouts. Collectively, this allows for better overall progress and avoidance
of cases of overtraining that so easily lead to injuries and illnesses.
Of the many benefits of 24-hour monitoring, here are four:
1. It allows an athlete to gauge the overall stress load outside of the
exercise routine. Often an athlete’s daily routine can add significantly
to his or her daily exertion, necessitating nutritional or recovery
intervention.
2. It gives a greater overall view of total caloric expenditure.
3. It can provide feedback on sleep quality (another recovery indicator).
4. It gives more real-time feedback about the body’s response to an
individual workout and consequently allows for real-time adjustments
to subsequent workouts, meaning it allows for smarter training.
Of course, all this requires that you use and analyze your heart rate data
correctly. So, understanding the basics of heart rate monitoring and training
is necessary for you to achieve results. Once you understand how to
monitor and interpret your heart rate response to any given exercise
scenario and how to respond (e.g., rest, increase intensity, decrease
intensity), you will be able to optimize your fitness adaptations. This
chapter provides the information that will give you the independence to
--- PAGE 19 ---
confidently individualize your workouts. But before we go into details, we
have important background information to cover.
Four Components of Physical
Fitness
The process of getting in shape involves the four components of fitness—
endurance, stamina, economy, and speed—and these are developed in
phases. This is also their order of progression as you train. Figure 1.1, the
basic model for training, shows these components schematically. Each is
developed at a specific intensity, and in the early stages of training is
optimally developed within a very specific intensity range. Exercising
below the target intensity zones will not deliver the stimulus required to get
in better shape. Exercising above the intensity range will result in
maladaptations such as increased risk of injury, premature peaking, or
staleness from overtraining, all of which result in poor performance. Each
component has a zone with upper and lower limits. Heart rate is the
simplest and most effective way to monitor intensity and therefore ensure
training in the correct zone of effort.
--- PAGE 20 ---
FIGURE 1.1 Basic model for training.
Here, we are trying to carefully mix both lay language and lab language
to get our concepts across. We will use the terms aerobic and anaerobic
quite freely to relate to these components of fitness. Oxygen is the common
currency of both the circulatory and respiratory systems, and while we don’t
count respiratory rates, these descriptions of your breathing will associate
well with aerobic and anaerobic work. The breathing involved with aerobic
work is so verbal it is like reading aloud one of Faulkner’s endless run-on
sentences that may last a whole page before coming to a period. The
breathing involved in anaerobic threshold work is less verbal, more like a
classic Hemingway sentence of just several trenchant words. The breathing
involved in anaerobic work is almost wordless with listeners hearing only
very heavy, fast panting. Review the following definitions and explanations
of these key components of fitness.
Endurance (Phase I)
Endurance is our first phase of training, and endurance is the ability of a
muscle to repeat a movement aerobically, no matter how much it slows
--- PAGE 21 ---
down, until it runs out of fuel. Jogging for fun and fitness and long runs for
a marathon are classic examples of endurance development exercises. To
develop the endurance for a marathon, for example, requires lengthening
each of the weekly long runs by a couple of miles. As runners reach their
current level of endurance, they approach the point where fuel supplies of
glycogen run low. To meet today’s mileage goal, they slow down to finally
make it to the end of the workout. Endurance improves as muscles learn
how to improve their metabolism of fat supplies. Simply put, it’s going
from point A to point B no matter how much you have to slow down to
lower levels of intensity. In general, basic aerobic endurance is developed at
heart rates of less than 75 percent of the maximum heart rate (MHR). Think
of this phase of conditioning as getting into shape. If you wish to jog to
simply stay healthy, this is as hard as you have to work.
Stamina (Phase II)
Stamina is the second phase of training, and stamina is the ability of a
muscle to repeat the movement at faster rates without exceeding your
anaerobic threshold. Think of it as the ability to go at this faster pace, but
over a shorter point A to point B distance. The objective of stamina training
is to improve your tolerance of oxygen debts by minimizing the use of
carbohydrate fuels (glycogen and glucose) while maximizing the use of
fatty fuel. Consider this phase of conditioning as getting ready to race. The
fitness emphasis in this phase is on preparing the cardiovascular and
respiratory systems to work hard without overreaching. Steady-state
workouts at 75 to 80 percent MHR for 45 to 60 minutes are good examples
of stamina workouts. Tempo workouts at 80 to 85 percent for 20 to 30
minutes are great for improving stamina to a slightly higher level. If you are
a recreational athlete who wants to participate in events and finish smiling,
this is as hard as you need to work. In general, stamina is developed in heart
rate zones of 75 to 85 percent MHR.
Economy (Phase III)
Economy is our third phase of training, and economy is the ability of the
muscle to repeat movements at an even faster rate, albeit for a shorter time,
above its anaerobic threshold. Economy training develops the ability to
--- PAGE 22 ---
handle race paces while tolerating increasing levels of oxygen debt, which
leads to the accumulation of lactic acid in the muscles. Economy workouts
train the muscle cells how to optimize the use of oxygen and carbohydrate
fuel at this higher level of effort. Think of this phase of conditioning as
improving your racing fitness by adding more horsepower to your engine
through workouts such as interval training, hill sprints, and fartlek running.
(Fartlek, which literally means “speed play,” is a Swedish system of
conditioning that features frequent changes in speed.) Good examples of
economy workouts are those at moderate to high intensity for continuous
tempo paces, or interval workouts featuring longer repetitions. If you wish
to compete in athletic events, working this hard has to be included in your
training program. In general, economy is developed in heart rate zones of
85 to 95 percent MHR.
Speed (Phase IV)
Speed is our fourth and final phase of training, and speed is the ability of a
muscle to repeat the movement at its maximum rate at full power under
anaerobic conditions. It is the ability to go at top effort for short periods of
time and to stay relaxed while tolerating increasing levels of lactic acid in
the muscle tissue. The power training in this phase also will bring about
final improvements in strength, flexibility, and coordination. Uphill sprints
and interval workouts of shorter, faster, and maximum-intensity repeats
with long and full recoveries are the best examples of speed workouts.
Some might describe this wish to compete at full capacity as joining the
P.T.A. (pain, torture, and agony) Society as you learn how to withstand the
maximal exertion. In general, speed is developed in heart rate zones of 95 to
100 percent MHR and often at speeds in excess of race pace.
We fully recognize that these are not exactly dictionary definitions or
standard laboratory usage; however, they are commonly used in the popular
literature when discussing exercise and fitness. For the purpose of this
book, we feel that they are useful in understanding the proper heart rate
ranges so you can safely progress up the training triangle all the way to
championship shape, depending on your goal. We start by identifying these
concepts because they tie in well with the concept of oxygen use, which, of
course, is conveniently estimated (albeit indirectly) by your heart rate.
--- PAGE 23 ---
Figure 1.1 on page 5 is our version of the classic training triangle and offers
a graphic representation of this approach.
Activities in the lower, easier zone result in specific physiological and
biomechanical adaptations, whereas those in the upper, harder zone have
their own important, yet different, biochemical and neurological
adaptations. Developing speed requires fairly sophisticated training
methods at even narrower effort zones within the anaerobic section of the
triangle. These will be discussed in more detail in later chapters.
Table 1.1 illustrates another way to present much of what we have
covered so far and will talk about in later chapters.
Consider the categories in table 1.1 with open-mindedness because the
zones range as wide as 15 percent. The reason for this is that, in our
experience, people generally run more comfortably at higher heart rates
than they bike, row, or swim. While running in your endurance zone, you
might be closer to the 70 to 75 percent mark; whereas when swimming, you
may be closer to the 60 to 65 percent mark. When you become well trained,
you will be able to perform more comfortably toward the upper level in any
activity, which is the way we’d expect you to progress. An additional point
about your maximum heart rate numbers: They will be different for each
activity. Therefore, you need a true maximum heart rate for each activity,
especially if you’re a triathlete. We will talk more about this in later
chapters.
Personal Considerations
--- PAGE 24 ---
Essentially, all people are made from the same parts. However, important
differences, such as training objectives and genetics, affect their responses
and adaptations to exercise.
Do you want to improve your cardiovascular health and control your
weight? If so, then we suggest that you exercise frequently and extensively
at the very low levels of aerobic endurance effort, but don’t expect dramatic
short-term gains. You need to make exercise a lifestyle habit.
Does simply participating (but not really competing) in a 10K road race
with the goal of just finishing with a smile seem like a good way to enjoy
social recreation? If so, then for several months to a year, patiently increase
the volume of your endurance training, but substitute a couple days of
training in the stamina zone of the triangle.
Do you want to compete and work hard at improving and setting
personal records (PRs)? If so, you need to add at least a day per week of
high-intensity, anaerobic economy or speed workouts at the very difficult
and mentally challenging level.
The preceding are general ideas to get you thinking about your training
goals. Your reasons will affect your target heart rate choices. Your responses
and adaptations, however, will also be affected by something else: your
genetic makeup.
Everyone understands that an easy effort results in a low heart rate and a
harder effort raises it. Although this is true for the most part, the
relationship is not uniformly predictable, especially in terms of absolute
numbers. What this means is that two people exercising at the same
absolute heart rate (145 beats per minute [bpm], for example) may have
very different comfort levels and different physiological responses. Genetic
differences such as the composition of fast- and slow-twitch muscle fibers
can result in puzzling heart rate responses. Fast-twitch fibers (think
sprinters) have different oxygen consumption rates than slow-twitch fibers
do (think marathoners). Another factor that can result in widely different
heart rates in two people of similar ability and fitness level is the anatomy
and size of the heart. These differences may result in heart rates that differ
from 35 to 70 bpm in people running at the same pace. Target heart rates are
a lot like salaries—it’s best not to discuss them. Having a higher heart rate
than someone else does not mean that you are less fit.
--- PAGE 25 ---
Your personal training goals and genetics will affect your responses to heart rate
training.
One last genetic issue to point out is significant, but far less remarkable
—the difference in the heart size of men and women. This difference is
revealed by the average resting heart rates of 72 bpm for men versus 84
bpm for women. This book will help you monitor your training by showing
you how to measure your cardiac response to your program designed
around your specific goals.
Rate of Perceived Exertion: Your
Backup System
Individualizing workouts assumes that you understand the difference
between hard and easy effort. (The former makes you grimace and gasp for
air, whereas the latter allows you to laugh and talk all the way home.) Each
of us can make subjective distinctions between hard and easy tasks. Before
telemetric heart rate monitors made counting pulses so convenient, the rate
of perceived exertion (RPE), as illustrated by the Borg Scale, was the
standard for using one’s own capacity for subjective measurement of hard
and easy exercise effort. Dr. Borg’s 15-point scale could be used, for
example, to describe how average people might feel as they progressed
from walking a mile to trying to run it in 4 minutes. The scale described
resting or walking as a very, very light effort, whereas exhaustion is
--- PAGE 26 ---
described as beyond very, very hard. In addition, the Borg Scale also
introduced a value system of points ranging from 6 (resting) to 20
(exhaustion). In short, Borg tried to correlate quantitative measures with his
qualitative system.
Although the Borg Scale is useful, it is an arbitrary system because it
offers no objective way to measure exertion. For the competitive athlete, a
heart rate monitor is a better way to quantify those measurements.
Probably the most important reason for individualizing training is the
fact that people have different workout objectives. What exactly, as a
percentage of your maximum, are your target heart rate zones? The need to
calculate these zones is the challenge that brought us to share our collective
wisdom with you. So, there are plenty of reasons for using the information
in this book to help you use your heart rate monitor intelligently. Your body
is not like anyone else’s, so why work out like anyone else? Whatever your
unique genetic gifts, current level of fitness, or goals are, this book will help
you determine your target heart rates and individualize your training.
Monitoring the heart rate of members of soccer, rugby, football, and
lacrosse teams is growing as well as in athletes in other nonaerobic settings
such as wrestling, weightlifting, and boxing. However, because of the start-
and-stop nature of these sports, the use of heart rate to monitor intensity is
somewhat limited; what it actually provides is information about energy
expenditure and recovery rather than overall intensity. This doesn’t mean
that you cannot use heart rate if you participate in these sports. Like aerobic
athletes, you can use heart rate to monitor your training status and intensity
during the aerobic training portion of your conditioning program or with
interval training (a conditioning system that consists of repeated efforts over
a time shorter than the length of the competition and done at fairly high
intensities of 85 to 95 percent MHR), during which knowing the recovery
heart rate is valuable. It is also a useful recovery tool.
Using heart rate during higher-intensity anaerobic activity involves
other, more complex physiological responses. Toward the end of the book,
we provide more advice for using heart rate in the nonaerobic setting, but
for now our focus is on the typical endurance athlete—the runner, cyclist,
rower, cross-country skier, or triathlete.
--- PAGE 27 ---
What Heart Rate Reveals
Heart rate provides a lot of information, but you must have an accurate
monitor that provides reliable data. Accurate data will allow you to evaluate
your own responses, adaptations, energy expenditure, training programs,
and a lot more. The point to keep in mind is that you are embarking on a
quest for knowledge that is highly individualized and therefore more likely
to help you yield the results you want. Here is the information you can learn
from heart rate monitoring, provided you have an accurate heart rate
monitor:
Correct intensity for aerobic system development
Correct intensity for anaerobic system development
Correct durations for time spent in appropriate training zones
Appropriate recovery periods during interval training
Appropriate recovery periods between exercise sessions
Effective evaluation of adaptations to training programs
Early warning signs of overtraining
Early indications of heat stress
Early indications of energy depletion
Race pace strategy for longer competitions
This list should convince you that heart rate training is indeed
worthwhile (and these are only some of the benefits!).
Understanding Heart Rate
The simple beauty of monitoring heart rate is that it is based on your own
heart’s capacity and nobody else’s. The heart is a muscle, and it responds in
much the same way as any other muscle by getting bigger and stronger as
you work out. When you are not working out, the heart continues to pump
blood into your muscles to feed their repair and recovery. That’s why heart
rate can inform you indirectly about the state of recovery of your muscles.
If you still have microtears or are replacing fuel, your metabolism will be
elevated, and your heart rate will reflect that by being slightly elevated.
That’s why monitoring and recording your heart rate each morning when
--- PAGE 28 ---
you wake up will give you an idea of whether you’re still under a condition
of repair from a previous workout. This is why your morning resting heart
rate is one of the two most important numbers. Your maximum heart rate
(MHR) is the other. Maximum heart rate is the fastest or highest number of
times the heart can beat in a minute.
Maximum heart rate doesn’t really change as a result of training, but all
your training zones are calculated from that number. Therefore, you need an
accurate maximum heart rate (see the Determining Maximum Heart Rate
section in chapter 2). Resting heart rate, on the other hand, does change
with training and generally decreases with increasing fitness. At times,
resting heart rate can increase, which usually indicates fatigue, overtraining,
or sickness. Charting your resting heart rate can help identify these
conditions early.
Take a look at the resting heart rate response of a runner over a one-
month period depicted in figure 1.2. Notice what happens on the days
following a high-intensity sprint workout or a long run. Each time the
athlete performed a hard session or a long run, the resting heart rate was
elevated on the following day. This information is useful because it can help
the athlete adjust his or her workouts when he or she is not fully recovered
and possibly prevent overtraining and injury. This is an example of how
heart rate monitoring can help plan recovery, but it is equally useful in
determining exercise intensity.
--- PAGE 29 ---
FIGURE 1.2 Morning resting heart rate over a period of 30 days. Harder workouts
occurred on the day before each spike.
Depending on the intensity of the exercise you’re doing, you’ll get a
different adaptation throughout your body. We will simplify this by noting
that easier exercise causes cardiovascular (aerobic) changes and harder
exercise causes biochemical (anaerobic) changes. Both are necessary for
good performance, and too much or too little of either will cause
unwarranted adaptations. Your heart rate can help you determine the
intensity of your training, thereby keeping you in the desired training zones.
We’ll talk more about calculating target zones in chapter 2.
Intensity Relationship of Heart Rate
and Oxygen Consumption
Our discussion so far has focused on heart rate. However, oxygen uptake, a
close cousin of heart rate, is often mentioned in the popular literature.
Experts seem to contradict each other or, at the very least, confuse readers
as they recommend that training take place at various percentages of either
of these physical capacities. Furthermore, oxygen uptake capacity is
abbreviated different ways, sometimes as O or O uptake. At any rate,
2 2
O refers to the volume of oxygen consumed, and O max refers to the
2 2
--- PAGE 30 ---
greatest amount of oxygen someone can consume, which usually occurs at
maximum exercise intensity. In general, the fitter you are, the higher your
O max will be. Both heart rate and O are ways to measure how hard
2 2
(intensely) someone is working. Heart rate response is simply a measure of
how hard the cardiovascular system is working to distribute oxygen,
whereas O measures include heart rate and the work of the respiratory
2
system’s and muscular system’s use of oxygen.
During aerobic exercise, both heart rate and O increase as intensity
2
increases. However, the patterns of response for both variables are different.
In science, terms such as linear and nonlinear are used to describe
relationships between two variables. The term linear means that as one
variable increases, the other variable increases in proportion to the change
in the first variable. If one variable changes and the other changes but not in
proportion, that is described as nonlinear.
Although both heart rate and O increase in response to increasing
2
intensity, their responses are not entirely linear. For example, at lower
exercise intensities, both variables increase in a similar (linear) manner, but
at higher intensities, the heart rate response levels off (nonlinear) while the
O response continues to climb. This does not detract from the value of the
2
information but instead shows that responses vary.
Another important difference in response patterns is that we see a
dramatic and rapid increase in heart rate at the start of exercise regardless of
the intensity. Someone who begins to jog slowly may see a 25- to 40-beat
increase in heart rate right away that could go, for example, from 75 to 110
bpm. This heart rate will settle and may even decrease slightly after 5 to 10
minutes and eventually remain at 105 bpm. On the other hand, O
2
responds slowly at the start of exercise, and we may see only a small
change in the first 5 to 7 minutes that continues at a slow, steady pace, even
with abrupt changes in intensity. Heart rate will continue to respond
abruptly at the lower intensities and then smooth out and change more
slowly at the higher intensities. It is important to understand this
relationship because it can help explain aspects of performance such as
warm-up and recovery. Let’s look at the overall relationship of heart rate,
O , and intensity in more detail.
2
--- PAGE 31 ---
The relationship between heart rate and intensity is convenient. Although
O max is considered the gold standard for measuring intensity and work
2
capacity, its measurement is not easily available to the average athlete. This
measurement needs to be done in a laboratory and can be expensive. But, if
we can demonstrate a relationship between heart rate and O , we can use
2
the more convenient measure of heart rate to monitor training sessions
anywhere.
Table 1.2 shows what percentage of maximum heart rate you are
working at based on your percentage of maximum oxygen uptake. For
example, when you are working at 65 percent MHR, you are working at
approximately 48 percent of O max. Remember, these numbers are not
2
absolute; they represent an approximation of where you’ll be at a certain
heart rate and O . These numbers do vary a little more around the 70
2
percent mark, and for that reason, we need to use a range to ensure
accuracy. In either situation, exercise slightly above or slightly below 75
percent still represents an easy to comfortable workload.
To further clarify the relationship between heart rate and O , let’s
2
consider data from the Human Performance Laboratory at the University of
Vermont. Tables 1.3 and 1.4 show recorded data from two subjects. One
subject performed on a treadmill and the other on a bike. Both were fairly
well-trained athletes.
TABLE 1.2 Percent MHR– O max Conversion Chart
2
% MHR Corresponding % O 2 max Training adaptation
50% ~22% Minimal for trained athletes
55 ~28
60 ~42 Phase I: Endurance
65 ~48
70 ~52
75 ~60 Phase II: Stamina
80 ~70
--- PAGE 32 ---
85 ~78 Phase III: Economy
90 ~85
95–100 ~93 Phase IV: Speed
TABLE 1.3 Data for a 19-Year-Old Female Cross-Country Skier*
Time (min) Work rate (mph, % grade) Heart rate (bpm) O 2 (ml/kg/min)
0:30 5, 0% 51 4.1
1:00 5, 0% 93 11.3
1:30 5, 0% 107 19.9
2:00 5, 0% 116 29.5
2:30 5, 0% 115 29.7
3:00 6, 0% 117 29.5
3:30 6, 0% 120 29.1
4:00 6, 0% 118 28.5
4:30 6, 0% 126 30.3
5:00 7, 0% 128 31.7
5:30 7, 0% 132 31.9
6:00 7, 0% 137 36.0
6:30 7, 0% 142 34.9
7:00 7.5, 0% 144 38.0
7:30 7.5, 0% 150 37.7
8:00 7.5, 0% 153 37.7
8:30 7.5, 0% 154 40.3
9:00 8.0, 0% 156 39.7
9:30 8.0, 0% 159 42.6
10:00 8.0, 0% 162 42.7
10:30 8.0, 0% 163 45.0
11:00 8.5, 0% 163 41.6
11:30 8.5, 0% 166 45.9
--- PAGE 33 ---
12:00 8.5, 0% 167 47.3
12:30 8.5, 0% 171 45.9
13:00 8.5, 2% 173 46.4
13:30 8.5, 2% 171 47.5
14:00 8.5, 2% 173 48.3
14:30 8.5, 2% 174 50.7
15:00 8.5, 4% 173 51.6
15:30 8.5, 4% 176 54.8
16:00 8.5, 4% 180 54.8
16:30 8.5, 4% 183 54.7
17:00 8.5, 4% 183 58.2
17:30 8.5, 4% 182 58.1
18:00 8.5, 6% 182 59.6
18:30 8.5, 6% 183 61.2
19:00 8.5, 6% 183 64.2
*Test subject performed on a treadmill. Anaerobic threshold: 171 bpm; O max: 64.2 ml/kg/min; MHR: 183 bpm.
2
TABLE 1.4 Data for a 45-Year-Old Male Cyclist*
Time (min) Work rate (watts) Heart rate (bpm) O (ml/kg/min)
2
0:30 120 110 3.4
1:00 120 109 7.0
1:30 120 105 24.0
2:00 120 104 25.0
2:30 120 100 26.1
3:00 180 102 22.3
3:30 180 109 27.3
4:00 180 113 28.1
4:30 180 114 31.8
5:00 240 115 32.3
--- PAGE 34 ---
5:30 240 118 33.2
6:00 240 127 36.8
6:30 240 130 41.6
7:00 280 134 42.8
7:30 280 139 42.4
8:00 280 141 45.7
8:30 280 142 47.3
9:00 320 145 48.0
9:30 320 149 50.4
10:00 320 152 53.0
10:30 320 156 51.5
11:00 360 156 57.9
11:30 360 159 56.1
12:00 360 163 59.5
12:30 360 164 58.4
13:00 400 167 62.2
13:30 400 169 62.8
14:00 400 172 64.8
14:30 400 173 67.0
15:00 410 173 66.0
15:30 410 175 68.3
16:00 410 177 67.2
*Test subject performed on a bicycle. Anaerobic threshold: 152 bpm; O max: 68.3 ml/kg/min; MHR: 177 bpm.
2
The tables contain data for work rate, O max (ml/kg/min), and heart
2
rate (bpm). The other data of importance for both subjects is anaerobic
threshold, which is noted in the footnotes. Pay attention to the anaerobic
threshold data because we can use this as a reference point to demonstrate
the relationships between heart rate and O . Anaerobic threshold will be
2
discussed in greater detail in chapter 6. For now, note that anaerobic
threshold is the point at which you see heart rate creep up a little faster. It
--- PAGE 35 ---
also is the point at which you increase your anaerobic metabolism, which
results in faster breathing, a higher heart rate, and less talking.
Using heart rate calculations, you will see that subject 1 has an anaerobic
threshold that occurs at 92 percent MHR but only 70 percent of O max.
2
For subject 2, the heart rate at anaerobic threshold occurs at 86 percent
MHR but only 77 percent of O max. In other words, intensities will
2
always be lower when calculated as a function of O . The pattern of
2
response also is different between the two variables, and this partially
explains the different percentages. O max has a pretty linear relationship
2
with work intensity, whereas heart rate is linear only up to 75 to 80 percent
intensity. Then it flattens out and is nonlinear as you get closer to maximum
(see figure 1.3).
FIGURE 1.3 Heart rate versus O with increasing intensity.
2
Understanding this relationship is important because heart rate is a more
reliable indicator of changes in fitness at any given workload. O , on the
2
other hand, is a better indicator of energy expenditure because energy
expenditure is directly related to O . This is important because heart rate
2
response to a given workload will decrease with advancing fitness. O , or
2
--- PAGE 36 ---
energy expenditure, will stay about the same for a given workload unless
the subject loses weight.
Figure 1.4 illustrates the fitness testing of a 40-year-old male subject
before and after a brief training program. (These data are also presented in
table 1.5.) The subject was tested after three months of training. Even
though his body weight didn’t change much (he lost 4 pounds, or 1.8
kilograms), his heart rate decreased over time even though his O stayed
2
pretty much the same at all submaximum values and then increased at
maximum over time, showing improved fitness. Interestingly, maximum
heart rate was the same as pretraining data even though the ending work
rate was substantially higher. This is a desirable outcome.
FIGURE 1.4 Heart data for a 40-year-old male before and after 12 weeks of easy
baseline training. Data were collected on a bicycle in response to the same workload.
This is exactly the outcome you would like to have after a period of
training—lower heart rate at a fixed workload, same O max at a fixed
2
workload, but the O max is a lower percentage of maximum capacity
2
because maximum capacity has increased. (Improved skill levels also can
contribute to the improvement of oxygen uptake capacity.) Both of these
outcomes have to do with efficiency. The O max increases because of an
2
increased cardiorespiratory network in heart, lung, and skeletal muscle;
--- PAGE 37 ---
improved oxygen extraction; and improved fat metabolism. The heart rate
at the fixed load decreases because the heart muscle is now stronger and can
move more blood with each beat. The technical term for this is improved
stroke volume. Later in the book we revisit these data by expanding them to
look at power production at a given heart rate and how this can be used to
improve fitness.
--- PAGE 39 ---
Energy Expenditure Relationship
Between Heart Rate and O
2
So far, we have looked at the relationship between heart rate and intensity,
the relationship between percent MHR and percent O max, and how these
2
variables can change with appropriate training over time. An important
point is that there is a subtle difference in the response of both heart rate
and O . As mentioned previously, heart rate is linear only up to 90 to 95
2
percent MHR, and then it smooths out and changes little in response to
increasing workload. On the other hand, O continues to increase fairly
2
steadily all the way to maximum capacity. Figure 1.3 (see page 17) shows
the relationship between heart rate and O during a maximum exercise
2
test. If you take a close look at the data, you’ll see that heart rate reaches
maximum before O does. This means that you can increase intensity and
2
energy expenditure at maximum heart rate but not O max.
2
As intensity increases, so does energy expenditure, and O reflects
2
energy expenditure better than heart rate does. When we test subjects in the
lab, we always determine energy expenditure from the oxygen consumption
rates or O uptake. To do this, we need to understand the basic relationship
2
between energy expenditure (calories burned) and O . When people get a
2
O test, their scores are normally reported in milliliters of oxygen per
2
kilogram of body weight per minute (ml/kg/min). However, these data are
actually recorded in liters per minute (L/min) and then converted to
milliliters afterward. Consider this example of a 60-kilogram runner:
Runner weight: 60 kg
O max in L/min: 4.0 L/min
2
O max in ml/kg/min: 4.0 L × 1,000 = 4,000 ml
2
4,000 ml ÷ 60 kg = 66.6 ml/kg/min
How much energy expenditure is taking place at this level? To answer
this question, you need to remember the following relationship: 1 L oxygen
= 5 cal. Therefore, a runner consuming 4.0 L/min (or 66 ml/kg/min) is
burning approximately 20 calories per minute.
--- PAGE 40 ---
Now we can calculate the energy expenditure for any athlete in any sport
at any intensity with some basic data. But more important, you can see that
energy expenditure is a function of oxygen consumption and not necessarily
of heart rate because the heart rate response to exercise changes as a
function of many factors (which we’ll discuss in chapter 3), whereas O
2
tends to stay the same at rest or at any given workload.
Any treadmill or stationary bike these days can calculate (guestimate)
calories burned. When you exercise, you are moving a given load (your
body weight) at a given speed or over a distance, or overcoming a load,
such as the resistance on a bike. This provides a few known variables: loads
or forces and distances. Using this information, we can calculate how much
oxygen is needed to perform the workload. From there, we apply our 1 L
oxygen = 5 cal calculation to get energy expenditure.
When you get on a treadmill, the system asks for your weight. From
there, it uses the speed and grade you select to calculate the rest. A
stationary bike doesn’t need your body weight. Instead, it uses the selected
level of resistance as the weight. As you get fitter, the O requirement
2
doesn’t change because the load stays the same, but your heart rate should
decrease in response to the same load. This is another way to use heart rate
to evaluate fitness response to a given workload. Now you can select a
workout with the goal of burning a certain number of calories and even take
it outside.
By now you’re well on your way to understanding the relationships
among intensity, heart rate, and O and can calculate anaerobic threshold
2
and heart rate changes at a given pace to changes in fitness over time,
among other things. The coming chapters will add to your knowledge of
how and why to use heart rate to guide your training program.
--- PAGE 41 ---
CHAPTER 2
Evaluating and Customizing
Your Zones
T
his chapter addresses what the heart rate numbers should look like
depending on your chosen intensity. We also discuss calculating both
maximum heart rate (MHR) and target heart rate zones properly. As we do
this, we identify sources of error in the measurements so you’ll know right
away if there’s a problem. Finally, we discuss how the numbers should
change as you progress with your exercise program. Most important, you’ll
understand how to manipulate your training times and intensities by using
heart rate to ensure that you optimize your training and adaptations. We’ve
included additional information about the heart rate response and
distribution of the population in general to give you a bigger overall picture.
However, we start with the basics—getting used to the heart rate monitor
and learning what the numbers mean.
Facts and Myths About Heart Rate
Numbers
What do heart rate numbers mean? Before interpreting the numbers, we’d
like to share our experience in understanding heart rate responses to
exercise. This is one of the most important benefits of this book because
this information is seldom included in the instruction manuals that come
with heart rate monitors. Knowing some basic truths and common
--- PAGE 42 ---
misunderstandings can help you avoid getting false feedback from your
monitor. To see how well you understand heart rate, read each statement
and determine if you believe it is true or false.
1. The popular formula of subtracting your age from 220 bpm for
predicting MHR is reliable for everyone.
2. Treadmill or bike testing for MHR is not a learned skill and takes no
experience.
3. Treadmill or bike cardiac stress tests administered in physicians’
offices often fall far short of revealing actual true MHR.
4. A heart rate number is a heart rate number. In other words, once
you’ve got a heart rate training zone for any sport, you can apply it
across a range of sports.
All in all, what you see on a heart rate monitor will be reliable and valid.
But too many people who have spent money on monitors bury them in the
back of their sock drawer and don’t use them because they have become
frustrated by irrational numbers. So, let’s see how you did on the quiz.
Myth 1: Predicting Maximum Heart Rate
The idea that anyone can subtract his or her age from 220 bpm to predict a
reliable MHR is a myth. That is only helpful for 65 percent of the
population. Here’s a real-life example from Bob Johnson, who doesn’t
realize that he has an exceptional heart. When he bought a monitor at age
55, he had no idea that his MHR was way above predicted average. By
using the age-adjusted formula suggested in the instructions that came with
the monitor, he calculated his MHR to be 165. Using the standard target
heart rate zone of 60 to 70 percent for an easy aerobic workout, he set his
receiver to beep when he was outside the zone of 99 to 115 bpm. Bob went
out for a jog and within minutes was exceeding 115 bpm. He slowed down
to keep the alarm from sounding. In another few minutes, he was reduced to
walking and then to a crawl to keep his monitor quiet. This was not the
monitor’s fault. It was merely doing its job by warning him that he was out
of his target zone. Bob knew that he was not in bad shape for his age, but
this was shocking. After a few more workouts, Bob’s puzzlement over his
new purchase was growing into a good case of frustration.
--- PAGE 43 ---
What was wrong? Bob didn’t realize that he had a smaller-than-average
heart and that it could compensate by being able to reach a much higher
MHR. In fact, his actual MHR turned out to be an even 200 bpm, 35 beats
higher than predicted by the conventional formula.
So what’s the story? Let’s start with this fact: The average MHR of a
brand-new baby, who has a heart the size of a walnut, is 220 bpm. And we
know that as a person grows up, the heart also grows bigger. At adulthood,
the heart is about the size of the person’s fist. Naturally, it has more
capacity for holding blood in its chambers. This means that more blood is
pumped with each stroke (greater stroke volume), and hence, fewer beats
are required. By age 20, growth of the heart brings the average MHR down
to about 195 bpm. From that age, the aging process causes a further decline
at the convenient rate of about one beat per year. This explains the logic of
the formula 220 minus age equals predicted MHR.
Now here is the key to understanding why Bob could hit 200 at age 55.
Maximum heart rates are naturally spread across the standard distribution of
a bell-shaped curve. As with intelligence, there is a wide range from one
end of the curve to the other for people of the same age. On each of the plus
and minus sides of the mean is a standard distribution of MHR of 12 bpm.
This distribution means that only those at the mean can reliably predict
MHR by using the age-adjusted formulas. Depending on where you fall on
the curve, your MHR may be as high as 36 bpm above or below what the
formula predicts.
Trust us on this one. Long before telemetric heart rate monitors, when
we used our fingers to palpate carotid arteries (the jugular vein in the neck),
we counted maximum heart rates as high as 200 and as low as 140 bpm for
50-year-olds. People with high maximum heart rates simply have smaller
but much quicker hearts. Some young adults whose hearts are as big as
grapefruits have maximum heart rates of 140 to 160 bpm at truly drop-dead
levels of fatigue, and this is normal. Admittedly, these examples are few and
far between, but they do exist, and maybe you’re one of them. The bottom
line: You need an accurate measure of maximum heart rate.
Myth 2: Enduring Fitness Testing
--- PAGE 44 ---
It’s true that someone not experienced with exhaustive levels of athletic
effort might not do well on a first max treadmill stress test. So the idea that
treadmill or bike testing for MHR is not a learned skill and takes no
experience is a myth. People often bail out long before they reach their true
maximum values because they don’t know how to endure the pain of full
fatigue or they simply are unfamiliar with this level of effort and are
uncomfortable with it. True MHR is not reached until the beats per minute
plateau and refuse to rise any higher no matter how much harder, faster, or
longer the subject moves. Most rookies have to survive several close
brushes with exhaustion before they realize how hard they can push
themselves and what levels of fatigue they can endure and live to tell about.
If you have suspicions about your MHR, keep trying by repeating the tests
we recommend, or checking your monitor at the end of really hard
workouts or races.
--- PAGE 45 ---
Even an endurance fitness test in a clinical setting may not accurately reveal true
maximum heart rate. Athletes have to push themselves until their heart rate plateaus,
which is beyond what many people can endure.
Myth 3: Getting a Real Maximum Effort
Doctors usually don’t like to stand around watching patients perform heroic
feats of athletic endurance during exercise stress tests. Because doctors are
in the business of detecting hidden heart disease, treadmill or bike cardiac
stress tests administered in a physician’s office are usually submaximal and
don’t reveal true MHR. Symptoms of coronary artery problems usually
surface once the subject reaches or slightly exceeds anaerobic threshold
(AT). Despite the fact that the anaerobic threshold is fitness dependent and