--- PAGE 161 ---
the higher-intensity threshold work and finally into the red zone where
intensity is very high and speed is very fast.
You will also remember the four training phases that specifically target
endurance, stamina, economy, and speed. These phases span the spectrum
of energy systems ranging from very aerobic to slightly anaerobic
(economy) to highly anaerobic (power). The training triangle emphasizes
the importance of developing your systems progressively. You can develop
your anaerobic systems only after you have developed an appropriate
endurance (aerobic) base.
Depending on your initial level of fitness, developing an adequate
aerobic base can take from 4 to 20 weeks. As a general rule, we classify
aerobic fitness according to maximum oxygen consumption values. This
data is presented in chapter 10 in tables 10.2 and 10.3 (page 153). However,
because most of us do not have access to the technology required to
measure such values, we have provided a classification table (see table 8.1)
that uses a more accessible method by using your 5K time. Using this table,
you can figure out whether you are a beginner (needing 16 to 20 weeks), at
the intermediate level (needing 12 to 16 weeks), or advanced (needing 4 to
12 weeks).
Now that you have a sense of how to organize programs, it is time to
look at some of the other factors and terms related to program design.
Factors in Program Design
As we move on in our discussion of training and using heart rate, we want
to make sure you understand the related training concepts and variables you
must consider when developing a training program. Heart rate, although an
extremely important variable, is only one measuring tool. To design a good
program, you should also understand the following eight basic,
straightforward principles of exercise prescription:
1. Frequency
2. Intensity
3. Duration
4. Mode
5. Overload
--- PAGE 162 ---
6. Specificity
7. Reversibility
8. Maintenance
Collectively, these eight principles dictate your current level of fitness.
Let’s look at each principle in greater detail.
Frequency is a measure of how many times you exercise in a week.
Basic fitness guidelines advise three to five times per week. However, this
can vary significantly depending on the interaction between intensity and
duration.
TABLE 8.1 5K Race Times for Runners at Different Levels
Beginner >29:30
Intermediate 22:30–29:29
Advanced <22:29
As a general rule, beginners should exercise three or four times per week
with a rest day scheduled every other day. Intermediate athletes should
exercise four to seven times a week. Advanced athletes may exercise up to
15 times a week. More competitive athletes often exercise twice a day,
incorporating one aerobic session and perhaps one weightlifting session, or
one session may be slow and the other fast. The bottom line is that virtually
all of the more competitive athletes exercise at least seven times a week.
Intensity is a measure of how hard you work, and your intensity must be
planned and correlated with your progression. In chapter 1, we showed that
intensity can be measured by percent MHR (maximum heart rate) or
percent O max. Heart rate is the simplest and most effective tool for
2
guiding intensity. You can ensure the adaptation you need for the training
phase you are in by selecting the appropriate intensity. People often
exercise too hard too early in their training programs and then get injured or
fail to develop the appropriate foundation needed for higher intensity later
on. Classifying yourself properly from the beginning will guide you in
selecting the right intensity.
--- PAGE 163 ---
Duration is the length of the exercise session, the recovery interval, or
the repetition. As a general rule, the longer the duration, the more the
intensity will increase. Duration becomes an intensity factor over time
because fatigue during a workout is cumulative, unless the exerciser slows
the rate or pace of the workout. Even then, duration will eventually become
an intensity factor. Duration is important because it is often manipulated to
ensure a certain intensity stimulus. It also determines whether you will need
to refuel your energy during an exercise session. Duration and intensity are
closely intertwined.
Mode refers to the type of activity you do. Running, swimming, and
cycling are all examples of exercise modes. Mode is relevant for the
development of efficiency, especially mechanical and metabolic efficiency.
It also has implications for energy expended because different activities
burn calories at different rates, even if the heart rate is the same. We also
can be at different intensities or perceived efforts in different modes while
exhibiting the same heart rate. Triathletes often notice greater comfort
running at a heart rate of 140 bpm versus biking or swimming at 140 bpm.
The four factors discussed so far—frequency, intensity, duration, and
mode—are the four core principles that are essential in the initial design of
any exercise program. The next four components are more concerned with
the progression of the program.
Overload refers to the increased demand placed on the muscular system.
It simply means requiring the system to do more. Overload, sometimes
referred to as progression, is also concerned with how much you increase
your volume or intensity over time. As a general rule, beginner and
intermediate athletes should not increase volume by more than 10 percent in
any given session during a two- to three-week period, the exception being
when total duration is 10 or fewer miles per week, which may make a 15
percent increase more appropriate. This increase assumes a minimum of
three exercise sessions each week. In other words, you should do at least
eight exercise sessions in a row at the same load before implementing an
increase.
For example, let’s say a beginner runs Monday, Wednesday, and Friday.
He or she runs 3 miles (4.8 km) a day for a total of 9 (14.5 km) miles a
week. After two weeks, this mileage would increase to approximately 10.5
miles (17 km) a week, or three runs at 3.5 miles (5.6 km) each. This
--- PAGE 164 ---
progression model is slow, but it helps prevent injury and muscle damage
while also allowing adequate time for multiple systems to adapt to the new
overload. Using percentage of volume to increase overload is difficult
because of the small amounts of increase. Instead, you can use time, which
is easier to measure and monitor.
Specificity has two components—metabolic specificity and muscle
contraction specificity. Specificity is concerned with putting the correct
type of stress on your metabolic and musculoskeletal systems. For example,
have you ever seen a really good runner struggle to swim 400 meters in the
pool? Essentially, we become efficient at specific muscle contractions
through practice and training. For runners this might require sprint work,
for cyclists it might be hill work, and for triathletes it might involve
working on transitions. The bottom line is that specificity has to do with
coordinating your central nervous system to work in conjunction with your
metabolic demands during muscular contractions. For many athletes this
requires training at various speeds and intensities and in the mode that is
most important. Of particular importance in this category is speed work, but
again, only when the endurance base has been built. LeBron James doesn’t
practice his free throws by dunking the ball and Yo-Yo Ma doesn’t prepare
for his cello concerts by playing the violin; their training is specific.
Reversibility relates to losing whatever fitness you have gained. The
amount of time it takes to lose fitness varies among athletes and types of
fitness. For example, aerobic fitness begins to decline without exercise in
about 10 days. Muscular strength will not decline for about 30 days.
Athletes often have a hard time grasping this concept. They believe that if
they can’t work out, the system starts to reverse and fitness is lost within
one or two days. Consequently, many athletes do not rest appropriately for
important races, especially long races such as marathons or Ironman
triathlons. In reality, well-trained aerobic athletes do not lose fitness for at
least seven days. In fact, with appropriate rest, they will improve
performance, which is what happens during tapering. Remember, the hard
part is getting fit; staying fit is a bit easier.
Maintenance and reversibility are somewhat linked. Maintenance refers
to hanging onto current fitness. Maintenance of fitness is achieved with
much less work and effort than improving fitness. If your goal is simply to
maintain fitness, you can achieve this with a 30 to 40 percent decrease in
--- PAGE 165 ---
volume at your current intensity. However, at certain points in your training
you can improve performance by decreasing volume and increasing
intensity. During the tapering phases of training, you can decrease your
volume up to 80 percent provided that you keep the intensity very high
(usually greater than 90 percent of MHR). This is why many athletes
dramatically cut volume but increase speed and intensity in the weeks
leading up to big races, yet still race faster. This is typically known as
“peaking” when done near the end of a season in preparation for
championship performances.
Now that you understand these programming principles, let’s consider
how you can manipulate them during training using heart rate training
zones. Remember, you are trying to build a logical and systematic program
to develop the elements of power, speed, and endurance that you need—and
do it without getting hurt.
Periodization
Before we get into the real nuts and bolts of building the program, we want
to take a look at the big picture of a training program. We refer to this as
periodization, and it describes the organization of an overall training
program. The program might be 12 weeks, six months, or one year long.
For Olympic athletes, it might be four years. Regardless of the length, the
program is organized around the scientific principles of progression. If you
plan your periodization correctly, you will find that you can align heart rate
intensities with periods in the cycle for the most part. The longer, slower,
base-building cycles will be characterized by much lower heart rates overall
(both at rest and during exercise) and display the phase I endurance zone.
As you move into higher-intensity cycles, your heart rate will elevate
significantly during exercise as you prime for race condition.
A well-organized program focuses on different components of overall
fitness during different periods—macrocycles, microcycles, and
mesocycles. The four phases of training—endurance, stamina, economy,
and speed—fit within these periods. In general, macrocycles are longer, or
more generally defined, periods of training that lack the specificity and
detail of microcycles and mesocycles. For example, a macrocycle in a six-
--- PAGE 166 ---
month training program might comprise the first 12 weeks of simple, low-
intensity aerobic conditioning designed to build an endurance base.
Microcycles are shorter periods with an increased focus on another
aspect of fitness. For example, in a six-month training program in which the
first 12 weeks are a macrocycle, two microcycles of four weeks each might
follow. These microcycles might include a focus on speed work, hill work,
tempo runs, or flexibility in order to improve stamina. During microcycles
we tend to focus a little more on the specific components, such as the
economy required for performance and racing.
Mesocycles are the final part of the periodization process. These are
individual sessions designed to address a particular skill component. A
mesocycle for a runner might focus on pacing, speed and power
development, or mechanics. For a cyclist, a mesocycle might focus on body
position or climbing posture. For a swimmer, it might focus on stroke
technique.
The use of periodization forces you to consider in detail the type of
adaptations you are looking for during a particular phase of your program.
It forces you to be organized, consider how long you have to adapt, and
decide where the competition occurs in your overall training program.
When designing an exercise program, you should be looking at the desired
end point, or product. Ask yourself, “What am I looking for in terms of
performance at the end of the training program?” When you can define that,
you can work backward to ensure that the correct amount of time is
available to ensure the adaptations needed. This prevents you from making
the basic mistake of progressing too rapidly and increasing your risk of
injury.
If you look back at the general structure of a training program through
the lens of periodization, you will see that more general conditioning
sessions occur early on (macrocycles), and that these become progressively
more specific (microcycles and mesocycles). Within each of these periods
you will also see variations in intensity, distance, recovery, and so on. Here
again, heart rate is your guiding tool to ensure that you stay within the
parameters of intensity you need to get the appropriate adaptation. Clearly,
being organized and plotting out your program is paramount.
--- PAGE 167 ---
Principle of Progressive Resistance
The principle of progressive resistance can be applied to either slow or
fleet-footed movements. A primary law of exercise physiology is that we
can condition our muscles by working them with repetitive movements to a
state of fatigue and then overloading them with a few more repetitions.
The most familiar application of this principle is weight training. We all
know that lifting weights can make us stronger. Perhaps you are familiar
with the two ways to weight train: lift a light weight many times or lift a
heavy weight a few times. Either one works, but only if the weight is lifted
enough times or is heavy enough to stimulate more muscle fibers to be
recruited into action, almost reach failure, and then be made to overload to
the quiver, struggle, and burn level.
Although there are important secondary fitness benefits to both types of
weight training, let’s consider a standard set of 10 repetitions (or reps) as an
example. A set of 10 reps is both safe and efficient for improving strength.
Start by selecting, through trial and error, the amount of weight that will
fatigue your muscle group within seven reps. The overload that occurs with
the eighth, ninth, and tenth reps stimulates adaptation. Once the muscle is
strong enough to move that weight 10 times without reaching overload,
increase the resistance to reach the next level of fitness and strength. How
long this process continues depends on your goal, but more resistance in the
form of heavier weights is necessary for getting stronger. For example, if
Larry Lifter found that he could reach overload with 95 pounds (43 kg)
when doing bench presses, once he could do his set of 10 reps, he would
add 10 pounds (4.5 kg) to reach the new overload. This process would
continue to 115 pounds (52 kg) once he could not overload with 105 pounds
(48 kg).
Now, let’s apply the principles of progressive resistance training to
walking, jogging, and running. In fact, you can extend this example
creatively to any of the endurance sports. The resistance for these activities
is the body’s weight against gravity. However, you won’t be moving heavier
weights to increase the resistance. In fact, as you get in better shape, you
may actually move less weight. Therefore, you have three choices for
increasing resistance:
--- PAGE 168 ---
1. Lengthen the duration of the exercise sessions—walk, jog, or run
farther at the same pace.
2. Add intensity by lifting your weight higher against gravity—walk,
jog, or run faster.
3. Add intensity by changing the degree of incline—head for the hills.
In other words, getting stronger and fitter by walking is like lifting a very
light weight many times. Jogging is like lifting the next increment of still
fairly light weight not quite so many times. Running is like lifting heavy
weights fewer times. Running up hills is akin to lifting the maximum
weight just a few times.
Workouts at slower paces in lower-intensity heart rate zones will take
more time, whereas faster workouts in higher-intensity zones will be over
more quickly. Your heart rate, patience, and goals will determine how much
or how little time you spend.
Monitoring Progress and Recovery
By now the concept of monitoring heart rate is familiar to you. You also
know that increased duration, if the pace stays the same, represents
increased intensity, and in general, increases in duration require more
recovery. However, because we know that heart rate is extremely versatile
and responsive, we can use it to monitor both acute and chronic recovery as
well as adaptations. In the next section we take a look at both acute and
chronic heart rate responses and consider how they can be used to regulate
intensity and recovery within an exercise session and also guide recovery
between workouts to prevent overtraining.
Using Acute Heart Rate to Guide Recovery Within an
Exercise Session
Heart rate response during exercise is typically a reflection of the intensity
of the exercise. During an exercise session, you may experience several
increases in intensity that cause a higher heart rate, such as after you climb
a hill. It also happens during speed interval sessions on the track. You may
have to slow down or stop after this brief period of increased intensity to
recover to some degree. An important question at this point is: When are
--- PAGE 169 ---
you ready to perform the next interval? Your within-exercise recovery heart
rate can help guide you safely.
You can determine when you are ready to start again by monitoring your
recovery heart rate. As a general rule, 65 percent MHR is used as the
criterion for adequate recovery. However, this is not a hard-and-fast rule. If
you are doing high-intensity speed or power workouts that last only a few
seconds, your coach might select a 50 percent recovery rate for 800-meter
intervals. The bottom line with recovery heart rates is that you must achieve
enough recovery to allow you to perform your complete workout with
sufficient quality rather than at significantly reduced speeds or efforts.
Generally, fitter athletes use higher percentages of MHR while recovering.
Your appropriate heart rate recovery depends on how much and how
well you want to recover between bouts. In general, the faster or the higher
the intensity of the exercise piece, the greater your recovery should be. So,
for example, if you are running repetitions at 85 percent MHR, you would
need less recovery than if you were running them at 95 to 100 percent
MHR.
Here’s an example. A coach might select a 50 percent MHR target as a
recovery number. When the athlete’s heart rate drops back down to that
level, she can resume the workload or perform the next piece. Here is an
easy math example: A 20-year-old runner has a maximum heart rate of 200
bpm. The session comprises ten 200-meter repeats on the track. Following
the repeats, the coach can use time or heart rate to determine when the
athlete should start again. Some coaches use a combination of both. In the
current example, the coach does not have the athlete perform the next 200
meters until her heart rate drops below 100 bpm (50 percent of the
maximum heart rate). This is an example of using acute heart rate response
during recovery when monitoring heart rate solely within a given exercise
session.
Using Chronic Heart Rate to Guide Recovery After an
Exercise Session
Changes in heart rate measurement technology now allow us to collect data
for much longer periods extending beyond the exercise session (over 24
hours at a time). Because we can monitor heart rate over longer periods, we
--- PAGE 170 ---
can collect excellent resting and recovery data between days of exercise.
(You could refer to this as daily heart rate recovery.) This can guide daily
training intensities and allow you to make changes if you’re not fully
recovered from the previous exercise bout. This can reduce the likelihood of
acute overtraining and even injury.
Look back at figure 1.2 (page 12) to see this depicted. Here is an
example to illustrate this point. Let’s say you get into the habit of recording
resting heart rate, and your average heart rate when you wake up in the
morning is 52 bpm. On Sunday you do a 10-mile (16 km) run. You wake up
on Monday with a resting heart rate of 55 bpm. You choose to go ahead
with a scheduled track and speed session (low volume but high intensity) on
Monday. When you wake up Tuesday morning, your resting heart rate is 56
bpm. This is an indication that you have not recovered from the Sunday
workout (and Monday added to the dilemma) and that you should
implement either a very easy workout on Tuesday or preferably take a
complete rest day. This illustrates why good record keeping is useful. Using
this approach, you adjust the Monday (and Tuesday) workout and then
hopefully see that within one or two more days your resting heart rate
recovers to normal. If it does not, you may have a more serious problem of
overtraining or staleness on your hands. This will necessitate longer periods
of rest and strategic nutrition.
If you pay close attention to your heart rate not only during exercise but
also throughout the day, you will get a lot of feedback about your overall
state of recovery and readiness for the next training session. Again, this will
also help reduce the likelihood of injury.
Avoiding Overtraining and Staleness
You can avoid overtraining and staleness by both resting and training your
heart rates. Although overtraining is a complex issue, you can use heart rate
data to detect when you are training too much in the early stages of getting
in shape. Heart rate data can also warn when you are at risk of staleness
from stretching a running season past your peak.
Another important concept is overreaching, which applies to short-term
overtraining, as might happen after a particularly hard training session. This
usually occurs in the few days following a longer, more strenuous workout.
--- PAGE 171 ---
Overtraining applies to longer, more chronic periods of training too hard or
racing too often. This condition results after weeks or months of training
without adequate rest and nutrition. This is a more serious condition,
requiring lengthy periods of rest and attention to nutrition and perhaps
medical intervention. In contrast, overreaching can normally be addressed
with a few days of rest and a few hearty meals.
Using your heart rate monitor can keep you from developing either
overtraining condition. To use it effectively, you need to do two things:
1. Record and monitor your resting heart rate and exercise heart rate
response to a given workload as often as possible. These should be
documented over days, weeks, and months.
2. Understand how your heart rate should respond both at rest and
during exercise as you train. Make sure it is increasing and decreasing
as you would expect.
Addressing the first issue is fairly straightforward. The second requires
that you read on a little further. Under normal conditions, resting heart rate
should be back to normal within 24 hours of a workout. You should make
sure this is the case before proceeding with a higher-intensity workout the
following day. Over time, however, your heart rate should decrease both at
rest and in response to a fixed workload. The decreased heart rate response
under both situations is a result of improved cardiac muscle function—the
heart is stronger and can move more blood with each beat. We call this
increased stroke volume. If you are not fully recovered, then your heart rate
at rest will be elevated because it is still working at repairing tissues and
replenishing fuels. What’s more, if you are not recovered, your heart rate
during exercise will not increase to where it needs to be to supply the
needed blood flow. This results in the sluggishness or staleness athletes
often experience during early overreaching. It feels as though someone has
put the lid on the heart rate. As a result, you try to work harder but cannot
because the heart rate cannot elevate to give you the blood supply you need.
The result is a frustrating and psychologically damaging workout. Your legs
and arms are heavy, and the best thing you can do is go home, eat, and
sleep.
It is nice to have your 12-week program carved in stone. However, you
need to be open-minded enough to change your daily plan if your body
--- PAGE 172 ---
needs it. The question is, What should you do if your heart rate indicates
overtraining? The obvious answer is to cut back the volume of exercise you
are doing, especially for the next few days. For some athletes this is not
always possible, but there are a few other precautions you can take, like
decreasing intensity or frequency of hard workouts.
The first step is to determine whether you are in an acute stage of
overtraining or overreaching, or whether these are early symptoms of a
more long-term, chronic problem. To determine this, we ask athletes three
questions. (1) Are you finding your exercise sessions getting more difficult
or easier? If they are getting more difficult and they are the same workouts
(i.e., same speed), you’re overtraining. (2) Are you very tired but having
trouble getting good-quality sleep? If so, you are overtraining. (3) Do you
find it difficult to exert maximum effort during a routine training session? If
so, you’re overtraining. These three simple questions will help you
determine whether you are starting to overtrain.
Early stages of overtraining are really overreaching. Overreaching
generally occurs when there is a marked increase in intensity or volume,
which quite often happens to athletes attending a training camp where there
is a significant increase in workload within a short period of time. The good
news about overreaching is that it can be addressed relatively quickly and
easily, with three or four days of planned rest and appropriate nutritional
intervention.
Ignoring the symptoms and continuing to train with the mentality that
you just need to grind through the sessions will inevitably lead to classic
overtraining. Classic overtraining is a more long-term problem with more
serious consequences. It usually exhibits all the signs and symptoms of
overreaching plus a couple more: heart rate continues to be elevated at rest,
and exercise heart rates continue to be depressed despite efforts to work
harder. What follows tends to be a period of illness or sickness as a result of
a compromised immune system. At this point you are clearly overtraining
and facing several weeks or possibly several months of layoff from
exercise.
Fortunately, by monitoring your heart rate regularly both at rest and
during exercise, you can detect these early symptoms. Then, you can take
appropriate action to vary the intensity and duration of workouts to ensure
--- PAGE 173 ---
that you do not move from the overreaching condition into the overtraining
condition.
FIGURE 8.1 Organizational flowchart for program design.
One of the keys to ensuring that you do not overtrain is to consider your
abilities, nutrition, age, and recovery profiles when designing your training
program. An individually designed program will enable you to detect early
whether you are overreaching and overtraining. Developing appropriate
training programs requires an understanding of progression, duration,
intensity, and the other factors. You also need to clearly identify the length
of the training program. From there the program should be built using the
foundations described in chapter 1.
Putting It Together
We have covered the elements to consider in program design. Now we can
think about piecing together this puzzle. Look at the flowchart in figure 8.1
for an overall picture of what the program might look like in terms of time
focused on particular fitness components. We find it is helpful to plot out
--- PAGE 174 ---
your time frames generically and then go back into those sections and add
greater detail. Doing so results in a more detailed training program such as
the example provided for a 1,500-meter runner (see table 8.2). Workouts
that are designed to focus more specifically on a singular or particular
element of performance, e.g., starting position, are usually described in
detail in a microcycle session. The details of such a workout would be
described in a single microcycle cell (the cells in the bottom row of table
8.2).
To design an effective program, you need to know the type of
adaptations that must occur during the various cycles of the program. In
general, we recognize several cycles that must occur in an overall training
program: the base cycle (endurance-building cycle); a competition cycle;
and a recovery, or transition, cycle. A program that clearly defines each of
these phases will result in sound progression. It will allow you to peak at
the right time. It will also ensure that you have an appropriate taper phase.
As you look at the programs for the various sports, remember that the same
logic and organization applies for all sports. Always start with the low-
intensity endurance, or base-building, phase, which is the longest phase.
Then, methodically and patiently move through the more specific, higher-
intensity phases, which are shorter. The general model is the same for all
sports. The only variations are those that need to occur because of specific
movement patterns required by the sport. For example, in swimming, more
time might be spent doing drills.
Whether your goal is consistent recreational exercise, finishing an event
with a smile on your face, or to win an age-group award, having a plan
makes reaching your goal more likely. Even if you do not follow it 100
percent, at least you have an outline that you can adjust as your heart rates
dictate. This is important for both exercise heart rates and resting heart
rates. And in order for this to work, you must keep good records.
--- PAGE 176 ---
CHAPTER 9
Walking
T
he previous chapters delivered a great deal of theory as well as
practical advice on monitored training and its application to
exercising in general. The submaximal nature of walking, the activity
covered in this chapter, requires some exceptions to the concepts discussed
previously. Creative alternatives are needed. For example, although you
will use percentage of maximum heart rate (MHR) to determine your
training zones, you will use a special, perhaps slightly less than fully
maximum heart rate. The challenge is to find a lower zone of intensity that
will still accomplish the goals of improving endurance and stamina.
Your training zones will have wide ranges. You may need to rely on your
own perception of your effort to verify that the heart rates you see are,
indeed, reliable and effective. You’ll still use your heart rate to determine
how far, how “fast,” and how hard you should work out. This approach
should be both easy to follow and yet challenging enough to be effective at
elevating your fitness level.
In this chapter, you will learn to apply the overload principle of
progressive resistance to your walking. Just as someone must lift a light
weight many times to get stronger, walkers must take a lot of steps to reach
the point of muscle overload because of the rather weak challenge to
gravity. By comparison, sprinting is like lifting a heavy weight a few times
to reach muscle overload. In either case, you can track the oxygen demands
of your working muscles by keeping track of your cardiac system’s
response in heartbeats per minute.
--- PAGE 177 ---
This chapter will also require that you be the subject in a scientific
“study of one.” In designing your workouts, you will manipulate time,
distance, pace, and, especially, your effort as measured by your heart rate
response. Designing a workout is like designing an experiment, and these
components will be designated either the givens (the parts of your workouts
that are controlled) or the variables (the parts that are allowed to change).
A Quick Fitness Evaluation
Before proceeding, we must ask this question: What kind of shape are you in? Have
you been enjoying enough casual, unstructured walking long enough to be able to
comfortably walk at least 20 minutes two or three times a week and take one longer
stroll of 30 minutes once a week? Furthermore, during one of your 20-minute walks, can
you cover at least 1 mile (1.6 km)? If so, skip the next paragraph. If you cannot
complete that routine, read on.
Our programs are not designed for rank beginners who are just sliding off the couch.
If you don’t meet the prerequisite of 20 minutes two or three times a week (one of them
for at least 1 mile, or 1.6 km) and a 30-minute walk once a week, begin your program
with very slow, easy, gentle walks until you can accomplish these criteria. We suggest
that you start by trying to follow half of the described routine without worrying about how
far you go. Each week add 2 to 3 minutes to the walks until you reach the goal of three
20-minute walks and one 30-minute walk. Before trying to cover 1 mile in 20 minutes,
take at least one day off between walks in order to be fully rested. When you can pass
our test, you will be set to move on to our structured workouts.
The following program is an individualized, structured plan that you can
use to take your walking fitness to higher levels. Use your heart rate
monitor to make sure your effort is hard enough to reach the quality needed
to improve, but more important, to be sure that you do not try so hard that
you overtrain and come down with a case of shin splints or worse.
Classifying Your Current Fitness
Level
Before you can get a driver’s license, you need to learn to make a car move
where you want it to by practicing under proper supervision. Then you must
take the exam to earn your license. At this point, you should have your
learner’s permit and have had plenty of practice. Now you need to take a
--- PAGE 178 ---
test to determine your current state of fitness. This will help you pick the
appropriate level of workout as your starting point.
Carefully look over the outline of the following test to make sure you
understand all the instructions. Remember to wear a watch or take a
stopwatch so you can time yourself. Also, wear your heart rate monitor to
see how high your heart rate goes when you walk this time trial. Strap on
your heart rate monitor, reset your stopwatch to zero, take a deep breath,
and head for the track.
While doing the test, check your heart rate monitor every minute. Expect
a fairly even, steady increase in the numbers, but be aware that the highest
number may not be right at the finish of the test if you get tired and have to
slow down before the end.
Using a heart rate monitor while you walk is a good way to measure your training
level and optimize your intensity.
One-Mile Walking Test
1. Find a track or measure a flat trail with a smooth surface. (On a
standard track, one lap is 400 meters, or 7.5 feet short of a quarter of
a mile, so for 1 mile you will walk four laps, plus 3–4 more giant
strides.) Use the inside lane to be sure that you do not walk more than
a mile in the outer lanes. If you don’t have access to a track, measure
a route using your car’s odometer. This method may not be quite as
accurate, but it will be close enough for this test.
--- PAGE 179 ---
2. Warm up with several minutes of easy walking and stretching.
3. Start the stopwatch and begin to walk 1 mile. Don’t start too fast. Use
a steady marching-style pace that makes you feel you are pushing
hard. As you near the 1-mile mark, pick up the pace and finish strong.
Stop the watch. After the test, you should feel a little winded, but you
shouldn’t be exhausted.
4. Cool down with a few minutes of easy walking. Compare your time
to table 9.1 to determine your walking classification.
Adapted T. Iknoian, Fitness Walking, 2nd ed. (Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics, 2005), 13.
If you met the prerequisites noted earlier, you likely are already in the
health category. If you qualified in the fitness category, use the level 1
program to build a better base of endurance. If you reached the athletic
category, start at level 2. Level 2 will be especially stimulating for your
muscular and respiratory systems because it develops your stamina.
Determining Your Walking Maximum
Heart Rate
We have to admit that walkers present a bit of a conundrum when it comes
to testing for MHR. Estimating MHR through the methods described in
chapter 2 isn’t very reliable. For other sports and exercise activities, it is
standard practice to base target heart rates on percentages of MHR
identified as the athlete runs up a steep incline on a treadmill at a high rate
of speed. However, it is virtually impossible to walk to your MHR without
the test constituting cruel and unusual punishment because low-intensity
walking workouts inadequately challenge the muscular and respiratory
systems for such a high-stress test. Even so, you need to test yourself
somehow to calculate your target heart rates. The customized test described
here is still intense and should be attempted only with permission from your
doctor.
TABLE 9.1 Walking Classification Based on 1-Mile Walking
Test Result
Men (in min) Women (in min) Walking classification
--- PAGE 180 ---
>16 >17 Health
13–16 14–17 Fitness
<13 <14 Athletic
The Connolly-Benson stress test for walkers requires a treadmill. Before
starting the test, check your heart rate monitor for possible interference
from the electrical console of the treadmill. If your numbers are erratic and
make no sense, you may have to ask a friend to hold your receiver off to the
side out of the range of the treadmill’s control board.
Start by walking for 3 minutes at 3 miles per hour (4.8 km/h) to warm
up. Raise the elevation 1 percent and walk for 1 minute. Raise the elevation
another 1 percent and walk another minute. Continue raising the elevation 1
percent every minute. Do not hold on to the guardrails or hand bar.
Carefully monitor your heart rate a couple of times per minute. When the
combination of the speed and the incline make it impossible for you to keep
up, double-check your heart rate, note this number, and then slow the belt
speed and decrease the elevation. Walk for several minutes to cool down.
For walking purposes, you have established a maximum heart rate.
Your walking MHR is an important given that will allow us to use the
classic design of a scientific experiment for your progression in this
program. Your goal will be to get in better shape by walking farther without
exceeding your upper heart rate limit. The long-term variable of the
experiment is the period of time it takes you to cover the given distance
without exceeding your upper heart rate limit. As your endurance improves,
the walks will become easier and your heart will not have to work as hard,
thus allowing you to walk faster. Your current fitness level is the short-term
variable to measure if you can keep the other workout elements, such as
pace and terrain, constant as givens. Admittedly, the elements that influence
your heart rate on workout days, such as the temperature, the wind, surface
flatness, your degree of recovery from previous workouts, and your stress
level, can vary from day to day. By not exceeding your upper heart rate
target, you will ensure that you stay in the endurance- and stamina-
development zones.
Practical scientists deal with these varying conditions by using finagled
factors. You, too, may have to be a bit broad-minded and play with your
--- PAGE 181 ---
walking speed to adjust for conditions when you work out. To keep within
your target zone, you may have to slow down on bad days or speed up on
good days. It is okay for pace to be a variable. Look at the big picture to
make sure that your workout heart rates, not your speed, are constant over a
week or two.
In two to three weeks, you’ll notice that your heart rate response at the
same walking speed decreases. The goal is to track the slowly decreasing
number of beats per minute as you get in better shape. You will do that by
using the goal time of your workouts as another given. During each
progression, you will repeat the same workouts until you can cover the time
of each progression without exceeding your upper target heart rate.
In level 1, you’ll improve your endurance by doing more reps with your
light body weight as you walk longer.
Determining Your Walking Training
Zones
Your lower target heart rate is 50 percent of your walking MHR, and your
upper target heart rate for level 1 is 75 percent of your walking MHR. If
you decide to continue up to level 2, your target heart rate will be 85
percent of your walking MHR. As long as you are within this range and
definitely not exceeding the upper limit, you will be safe from the pace
police. Your challenge is to walk fast enough to at least reach your lower
target heart rate and then fast and far enough without exceeding your upper
target heart rate. These target heart rates will be givens in your fitness
measurement.
As you increase the amount of time you walk, another given will be the
distance and the variable will be your pace per mile or kilometer. Following
our heart rate heartlek protocol, you will change your pace as needed to stay
within your target zones.
You will do each workout within three heart rate zones: a lower zone, a
recovery zone, and an upper zone.
1. Your lower target heart rate is 50 percent of your MHR from the
treadmill test (page 140). This is the beats per minute you should reach
when you start timing your workouts. By the end of a 5-minute warm-up
--- PAGE 182 ---
walk, you must be going fast enough to approach this number. Keep in
mind that we’re looking for a realistic number that you’d see at a casual
stroll effort.
2. Your recovery heart rate is 65 to 70 percent of your walking MHR.
Use this target if you start to exceed your upper target. Just slow down until
your heart rate drops into this zone. Then, pick up the pace again and go
farther until you again start to exceed your upper limit.
3. Your upper target heart rate is always 75 percent of the walking
MHR identified during the treadmill stress test. If you doubt that number,
perform the test again and recalculate your target heart rates.
The progressions with each program level are designed to challenge you
by making you walk for more minutes. When you reach your upper target
heart rate, slow down and let your heart rate drop until it hits the recovery
rate; then pick it up again. Eventually, you will cover the entire workout
without reaching your upper target. When you achieve that, you’re ready to
graduate to the next progression.
Choosing a Training Program
Deciding where to begin depends on how you scored on the walking test.
Level 1 workouts will expand your base of aerobic endurance. Level 2
workouts will improve your stamina. Those are the first two phases of
conditioning for every endurance-based sport. The fitness developed here
may bring you to a point at which you decide to try something more
challenging. If so, you’ll be able to springboard off a fairly good base of
overall fitness.
Within each of the level 1 and 2 workouts below are progressions,
labeled alphabetically by level of difficulty. When you are able to complete
one progression without exceeding your upper heart rate target, you move
to the next progression. As you move from one progression to the next, the
conditioning responses you’re seeking will require longer and longer
efforts. When you are able to complete the last progression in level 1, you
may progress to level 2.
The programs that follow are based on the experimental model discussed
earlier, with upper target heart rate zone always being the primary given;
--- PAGE 183 ---
you should not exceed it during the workout. Variables are time, distance,
and pace. For example, at level 1 you are given a period of time to walk at
whatever pace feels biomechanically optimal. That pace should be close to
what you maintained during the walking test if you did not need a week off,
massage therapy, or medical treatment to recover from the strains to your
musculoskeletal system.
During a workout, if the additional distance causes your heart rate to
exceed your upper limit, you will need an interval of slower pace and easier
effort to drop to your target recovery number of 70 percent MHR.
Obviously, the more time you spend going slowly during recovery, the
shorter the total distance will be that you’ll cover during the prescribed
time. As your fitness improves, you will need less time for recovery, and
you’ll go farther in the same amount of time for each progression.
Eventually, your endurance will reach an optimal stage and you will enjoy a
healthy level of cardiovascular fitness. Once you are able to walk the
programmed number of minutes at the top speed at which you are
biomechanically comfortable, your reward will be to see how much easier
walking becomes by tracking both your morning resting heart rate and your
heart rate at the end of the workout. You’ll be able to walk at the same
speed at a lower heart rate, indicating improved fitness. When time is the
experimental given, then your improved fitness is the variable being
measured.
The walking program levels are based on your tested degree of fitness.
The progressive workouts in each level will incrementally take your
physical fitness to higher levels. The progressions are based on more
minutes of exercise. Use your recent history as well as your score from the
walking test to find a reasonable starting point. You will notice as you
review the progressions that they do not require you to follow them for a
certain number of weeks. How long you stay with a particular progression
will depend on your heart rate response. When you can complete the entire
workout without exceeding your upper target heart rate, it is time to go to
the next progression. That’s the beauty of this protocol: It offers a totally
individualized program. This means that you have the most customized
possible answer to the “What about me?” question.
Level 1
--- PAGE 184 ---
The level 1 workouts feature a range of minutes based on your time from
the walking test. Because the fastest time for a male in the fitness category
is 13 minutes and the fastest time for a female is 14 minutes, we’ve used a
target time of 30 minutes to start our progressions. The weekly long walk is
10 minutes longer. However, to customize the time ranges based on your
current fitness level, you can simply double your test time for your starting
workouts. So, if your test time was 15 minutes, then you would walk for 30
minutes. This will help you reach the goal of improving your endurance as
soon as possible.
Start each workout with an easy 5-minute stroll that slowly increases
your heart rate to your lower target (50 percent of your walking MHR).
When you can do these workouts without exceeding your upper target, go
to the next progression.
Progression A
Monday through Friday
Walk 30 minutes on three or four of these days.
Saturday or Sunday
Walk 40 minutes on one of these days.
Progression B
Monday through Friday
Walk 35 minutes on four of these days.
Saturday or Sunday
Walk 45 minutes on one of these days.
Progression C
Monday through Friday
Walk 40 minutes on four or five of these days.
Saturday or Sunday
Walk 50 minutes on one of these days.
--- PAGE 185 ---
After completing progression C, you may choose to continue this level 1
routine to enjoy a healthy level of cardiovascular health and long-term
weight control. Simply stay at progression C in level 1. However, if you are
interested in a higher level of physical fitness, repeat the 1-mile walking test
to see if you can reach the athletic category. If so, and you wish to work
harder and get healthier, proceed to level 2.
Level 2
In the level 2 program, you will face hard days of higher intensity that will
improve your cardiorespiratory fitness as you increase your effort to 85
percent of your walking MHR. There is only one practical way to elevate
your breathing and heart rate to stamina levels while walking: going
vertical. Yes, that means going uphill. This increases your resistance to
gravity and enables you to achieve a major increase in your working heart
rate. Choose stairs, stadium steps, hills, or incline settings on a treadmill.
The goal of the level 2 program is to develop stamina by increasing the
intensity of exercise. To reduce the risk of injury and overtraining, you will
need to follow the classic hard–easy workout pattern that allows recovery
from higher-intensity workouts by separating them with off or easy days.
You also may have to warm up an extra 5 minutes before your workout on
hard days. On recovery days, the closer you keep your effort to the lower
target, the more effective your recovery will be.
On the easy recovery days, walk for at least 20 minutes but not longer
than 30 minutes, keeping your heart rate between 50 and 60 percent of your
walking MHR.
Before you start the progressions, choose one of the patterns of hard–
easy workouts shown in table 9.2. Choose your pattern based on which
weekend day you prefer for your longer walk.
Both patterns require flexibility. Feel free to switch the off and easy days
as needed. However, if you have to miss a hard day, do not make it up the
next day and wind up doing two hard days back to back. Either skip the
missed workout and stick with the pattern, or move everything back a day.
In the long term, there are no penalties for doing back-to-back easy days.
However, the injury fairy may get after you for trying to do two hard days
in a row.
--- PAGE 186 ---
Level 2 workouts also use our experimental format. Each progression
designates the number of uphill trips you will walk. These uphill trips last
as long as it takes to reach your upper target heart rate and are followed by
downhill or flat recovery intervals until your heart rate drops to your lower
target heart rate. The time it takes you to hit the upper target depends on the
steepness of the surface. This provides a great deal of flexibility: Less
incline means a longer time to reach the target heart rate; more incline
means a shorter time to reach the target heart rate. But please stick with the
same incline during the three progressions because you must measure how
long it takes initially to reach your upper target. Proof of your improved
fitness will be the increasingly longer time it takes to reach that target. Your
recovery interval times between repeated uphill trips will vary as you
become more fatigued with each trip.
This program should significantly improve your stamina by the end of
the third progression, enough that you can move on to more intense
activities if that’s your goal. To prove it to yourself, see how much faster
you walk during the walking test.
The hard days of the level 2 patterns will use a higher upper target rate.
Calculate your new upper target heart rate by using 85 percent of your
walking MHR as discovered during the treadmill test (see page 140). Your
new target heart rate is appropriate if you start to fail the talk test just as you
reach the target number. You should be huffing and puffing enough to kill
your enthusiasm for saying even a quick yes or no.
Time is the variable on your hard days, provided you continue to use the
same venue. As proof of your improving your stamina, it will take you
longer to reach your target of 85 percent of walking MHR.
--- PAGE 187 ---
Progression A
Hard Days
Walk up the incline of your choice until you reach your upper target
heart rate. Time is a variable and depends on the steepness of the
incline. Once you reach your upper target (85 percent of your
walking MHR), walk back down the incline or lower the treadmill
incline setting until your heart rate drops to 70 percent MHR. Do this
twice. Before and after each workout, walk easily for 10 minutes to
warm up and cool down.
Easy Days
On recovery days, walk for at least 20 minutes but not longer than 30
minutes, keeping your heart rate between 50 and 60 percent of your
walking MHR.
Long Day
Once a week, walk for 50 minutes without exceeding 75 percent of
your walking MHR. Your time goal does not include whatever easier,
slower pace you need to warm up and cool down.
Follow progression A for two weeks. After the two weeks, take a
recovery week without hills. During the recovery week, walk 40 minutes
four or five times Monday through Friday and 50 minutes once on the
weekend.
Progression B
Hard Days
Walk up the incline of your choice until you reach your upper target
heart rate. Time is a variable and depends on the steepness of the
incline. Once you reach your upper target (85 percent of your
walking MHR), walk back down the incline or lower the treadmill
incline setting until your heart rate drops to 70 percent MHR. Do this
four times. Before and after each workout, walk easily for 10 minutes
to warm up and cool down.
Easy Days
--- PAGE 188 ---
On recovery days, walk for 30 minutes, keeping your heart rate
between 50 and 60 percent of your walking MHR.
Long Day
Once a week, walk for 55 minutes without exceeding 75 percent of
your walking MHR. Your time goal does not include whatever easier,
slower pace you need to warm up and cool down.
Follow progression B for two weeks. After the two weeks, take a
recovery week without hills. During the recovery week, walk 40 minutes
four or five times Monday through Friday and 50 minutes once on the
weekend.
Progression C
Hard Days
Walk up the incline of your choice until you reach your upper target
heart rate. Time is a variable and depends on the steepness of the
incline. Once you reach your upper target (85 percent of your
walking MHR), walk back down the incline or lower the treadmill
incline setting until your heart rate drops to 70 percent MHR. Do this
six times. Before and after each workout, walk easily for 10 minutes
to warm up and cool down.
Easy Days
On recovery days, walk for 30 minutes, keeping your heart rate
between 50 and 60 percent of your walking MHR.
Long Day
Once a week, walk for 60 minutes without exceeding 75 percent of
your walking MHR. Your time goal does not include whatever easier,
slower pace you need to warm up and cool down.
Follow progression C for two weeks. After the two weeks, take a
recovery week without hills. During the recovery week, walk 40 minutes
four or five times Monday through Friday and 50 minutes once on the
weekend.
Repeat progression C as long as you wish, but be sure to take a recovery
week after each two-week period of hill work. If your pattern is interrupted
--- PAGE 189 ---
for any reason and you miss two weeks or more, do at least one week of
level 1 training before resuming the level 2 workouts at a lower
progression.
Continuing Your Training
After completing level 2, you will be a very fit walker with a strong
cardiorespiratory system who will love going up steps while everyone else
uses the elevator. Enjoy your higher level of physical fitness as you decide
whether you want to try the challenge of jogging and running. If so, read
on.
--- PAGE 190 ---
CHAPTER 10
Jogging and Running
N
othing enhances compliance with an exercise program more than
convenience, and few activities are more convenient than jogging or
running. Just slip on your sneakers and jump on the treadmill or head out
the door. Compliance is also enhanced when you have a successful,
systematic approach to training and a structured program to follow that
provides results. The jogging and running programs in this chapter take into
account the health improvements from exercise that stimulate the
cardiovascular, cardiorespiratory, and musculoskeletal systems.
Unfortunately, as you seek to improve health and fitness to higher levels,
the risk of injury or illness also gradually increases for a while. These risks
are seldom to your circulatory or respiratory systems; however, chronically
ill-advised training can have premature aging effects on your
musculoskeletal system, especially your legs (e.g., arthritis).
Therefore, for your body’s sake, you need to understand the effects your
workouts might have on your health as well as your ability to compete in
races. The American College of Sports Medicine, not surprisingly, believes
that exercise is good medicine. Those folk also know that although ramping
up the intensity and volume of workouts can be beneficial, those harder
workouts also present health risks. The good news is that you can minimize
those risks with the individualization that our monitored and well-planned
training offers. Our guidelines, which regulate the intensity of your
workouts, are designed to provide you with safe and efficient training
programs. So, whether your age is 7 or 77, whether you are just beginning
--- PAGE 191 ---
or have been running for many, many years, we want you running for the
rest of your life by keeping your legs from aging faster than your heart.
Developing either recreational or competitive levels of fitness takes time.
Getting in better shape may take weeks or months. In previous chapters, we
discussed the physiological, biochemical, and biomechanical changes
associated with this process for all types of exercise and activities. This
chapter focuses on implementing these changes by jogging, running, and,
when appropriate, walking and cross-training.
The programs outlined here are designed for people who already have a
base level of fitness and want to use their time and energy more effectively.
If your most recent medical exam confirms that your risk factors are low, if
you have been jogging for 20 minutes three or four times week, and if you
can jog at least 30 minutes in one workout, you qualify to use the level 1
jogging program. If this does not describe you, get approval from your
doctor. Then take several months of very easy, slow jogging and walking to
reach these entry qualifications. If you currently run more frequently or
longer, be sure to take the O max test on page 151. to classify your current
2
level of fitness and choose a running program from levels 2 or 3 based on
your current fitness level and your running goals.
Jogging is an effective exercise for weight control, but it carries a
slightly higher risk of overuse injuries such as plantar fasciitis, Achilles
tendinitis, or even stress fractures because of the distances required to burn
off significant calories of fat. Be especially sensitive to aches and pains
from sore, stiff muscles and joints. Do not try to push through the pain.
What endurance athletes refer to as the pain barrier is the total body fatigue
and exhaustion that comes from going deep into oxygen debt during peak
performances at 100 percent effort. Pains in your muscles, ligaments,
tendons, and bones, however, are often symptoms of injuries and are not to
be ignored. Don’t just mask them with over-the-counter painkillers such as
aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS). Back off, rest
up, and then resume when the symptoms have gone away. Remember that
burning fat for fuel is maximized at 60 to 75 percent of your maximum
heart rate (MHR). Everything in between is productive, although with
slightly different benefits at either end.
--- PAGE 192 ---
Joggers and runners have one important initial training objective in
common: to improve endurance by training in the zone of 60 to 75 percent
MHR. For many joggers, good cardiovascular health, weight management,
and that intangible feeling of well-being are also major goals. For
competitive runners, endurance training is simply for building the
foundation of aerobic fitness to support the next stages of conditioning. A
runner’s training pattern needs to be more comprehensive and include
workouts that are not necessary for joggers.
The level 1 program for joggers features a series of progressions based
solely on heart rate targets to improve endurance. You need not overdo it by
working harder than necessary to develop endurance. (That may be good
news if you have been working harder than you need to.) If you only want
to jog enough to build fitness and manage weight, you will need to take the
MHR test on page 154, but you do not need to determine your O max or
2
anaerobic threshold because the level 1 program does not involve efforts at
those levels. After determining your MHR, you can move on to the
programs that begin on page 157.
The level 2 program is for you if you are a recreational runner who
wants to participate in 5Ks, 10Ks, half marathons, or full marathons and
finish smiling but are not looking to be competitive. If you want to be
competitive in 5Ks, 10Ks, half marathons, or full marathons or are seeking
peak personal record performances, the level 3 programs are for you.
--- PAGE 193 ---
Joggers and runners both seek to build a good base of endurance at low-intensity
effort while gradually increasing the duration of their workouts. Runners then build
on this base to reach higher levels of conditioning.
To answer the “What about me?” question, you need to do a little self-
evaluating and calculating. First, you need to classify your current level of
fitness. Second, you need to find your jogging or running MHR. Third, you
need to calculate your current anaerobic threshold. (If you are interested in
the level 1 jogging program only and meet the criteria described earlier, you
don’t need to classify your current level of fitness or determine your
anaerobic threshold.) This information will help you calculate your target
heart rate zones and build the best training program for you.
--- PAGE 194 ---
Classifying Your Current Fitness
Level
If you are a recreational or competitive runner, use this simple, modified
treadmill test to predict your oxygen uptake capacity, or O max. Use
2
tables 10.1, 10.2, and 10.3 to interpret the results and determine your level
of training. To get the most reliable and valid results, taper your training for
a few days before taking the test.
Start the test at a very slow speed to warm up. If you find the starting
speed of the test—6 miles per hour (9.6 km/h) at a 2 percent grade—fairly
easy, start with that speed and build this as a warm-up into the test protocol.
Run on the treadmill at the identified speed for each stage (see table
10.1). Adjust the speed every 2 minutes until you can no longer complete a
stage. The last stage you complete is your ending stage, or workload. Use
this stage to classify your fitness level and calculate your O max. If you
2
want to collect MHR data simultaneously, wear your heart rate monitor and
record your heart rate at the end of the test.
This prediction of your maximum oxygen consumption is based on a
formula developed by the American College of Sports Medicine (Williams
& Wilkins, 1995). Table 10.1 lists the approximate O needed to run at this
2
speed and grade over this time period. Once you have your ending O max,
2
look for your fitness classification in table 10.2 (if you are male) or table
10.3 (if you are female), using the maximum oxygen consumption value
you achieved. Your program level is determined by matching your O max
2
score from table 10.1 with the data in either table 10.2 or table 10.3. Find
the line on the table that corresponds to your age.
For example, let’s say you are a 30-year-old female and you complete
stage 4. Your predicted O max is 50.22 ml/kg/min. This would give you a
2
rating of average. We suggest you start with a level 2 training program.
If you score at level 3, you may immediately start your heart rate–
monitored workouts at the advanced stage of conditioning, beginning on
page 160. However, we strongly urge you to review the level 1 and level 2
programs to ensure that your endurance, stamina, and economy are
--- PAGE 195 ---
sufficiently developed to allow you to sustain a serious season of
competition and to peak at the right time.
Determining Your Running Training
Zones
Next we are going to learn how to determine maximum heart rate and
anaerobic threshold for running and then use that information to determine
your training zones.
Determining Your Running Maximum Heart Rate
Both maximum and target heart rates are sport specific. Because your
workouts will be based on target heart rate zones, we provide two runner-
specific tests for determining your running MHR. A formal treadmill stress
test in a cardiologist’s office or physiology lab is the best way to determine
your true MHR, but most of us don’t have access to such tests. The tests
outlined in this book provide good estimates and so are satisfactory
alternatives.
The first test, described in chapter 2, is best for those with more speed
than endurance. Surviving the three efforts of very high intensity and high
speed without significant muscle stiffness and soreness requires a very good
level of fitness.
The second test is better suited for those with more endurance and
patience, and a lower level of fitness. The protocol for this second test is
based on the design of a graded treadmill maximum stress test. The
difference is that it doesn’t require a treadmill. It uses the same graded
increments of increasing speed and intensity, but without the steep incline at
the end. Here is how you do it.
TABLE 10.1 Prediction of O max Based on Treadmill Running
2
Times
Stage Duration (min) Speed (mph) Grade (%) O 2 max (ml/kg/min)
0 2:00 6.0 2% 38.54
--- PAGE 196 ---
1 2:00 6.5 2 41.46
2 2:00 7.0 2 44.38
3 2:00 7.5 2 47.30
4 2:00 8.0 2 50.22
5 2:00 8.5 2 53.14
6 2:00 9.0 2 56.06
7 2:00 9.5 2 58.98
8 2:00 10.0 2 61.90
9 2:00 10.5 2 64.82
10 2:00 11.0 2 67.70
11 2:00 11.5 2 70.60
--- PAGE 197 ---
Find a 400-meter running track. Dress to run and put on your heart rate
monitor. Begin at the end of a straightaway at the start of a curve. Cover
eight laps as described. Check your working heart rate every 200 meters.
Lap 1: Walk an easy lap at your normal walking pace.
Lap 2: Walk faster for another lap at close to a marching pace.
Lap 3: Jog one lap at the slowest jogging pace you can manage.
Lap 4: Break into an easy, slow run at a conversational pace for one lap.
Lap 5: Run hard enough to lightly huff and puff at a short-sentences
pace.
Lap 6: Run hard enough to huff and puff hard and fast enough to lose
your desire to answer even a yes or no question.
Laps 7 and 8: Run faster on each of the last two laps, increasing the pace
and effort at the start of each curve so the last half lap is an all-out,
maximum effort.
Remember to check your heart rate every 200 meters. Expect a steady,
incremental increase at the end of each of the first six laps. Carefully read
your heart rate at least four times during the last two laps.
When you are running hard and wearing the monitor on your wrist like a
watch, seeing the numbers can be difficult. Try holding the monitor in your
hand and lifting it in front of your face as you run. To do so, buckle the
wrist strap and make a loop. Slip your middle two fingers through the loop.
Cradle the top and bottom of the face between your thumb and first finger
so it is in position for you to read when you swing your arm forward in its
natural motion.
Do not stop dead in your tracks when you are finished. After the final
lap, walk around while double-checking your heart rate. The highest
number you see during or right after the test is probably within several beats
per minute of your true maximum. For our purposes, that is close enough.
Before trying either of these tests, be sure your doctor has cleared you
for exercise. If you have any doubts about the validity of the test, repeat it
every week until you are satisfied with the results. Just remember that your
own MHR may be way over or under your predicted MHR from the age-
adjusted formula.
--- PAGE 198 ---
Determining Your Running Anaerobic Threshold
A runner in good competitive shape will have an anaerobic threshold (AT)
between 85 and 90 percent MHR, according to most experts. Anaerobic
threshold reflects your body’s ability to take in, distribute, and use oxygen
and depends on the capacities and the fitness of your respiratory,
circulatory, and muscular systems. These three systems, although
interrelated, enjoy different levels of capacity for work at the same time.
This means that AT is a rather fluid component of fitness and that there is a
direct correlation between your AT and your heart rate. If your AT is below
lousy, your heart rate will be lower than the 85 percent that you would
expect. Equally surprising can be how heavy and hard your breathing will
be at such low heart rates.
This can be explained by using an example of a runner whose training
has been strictly focused on endurance. Because almost all of the work is
done at highly aerobic effort in the 60 to 75 percent target heart rate zone,
the cardiovascular system gets lots of stimulation. However, the easy work
minimally challenges the respiratory or muscular systems.
As a result, when the workouts get more difficult, those latter two
systems are not in very good shape, even though the heart is much stronger,
as evidenced by the significant drop in resting heart rate.
After a long layoff or lots of easy distance work, you may find yourself
breathing hard at an easy heart rate such as 73 percent MHR, which means
you are probably training at your current AT. But don’t worry. You can raise
your AT to 80 to 85 percent with lots of stamina training, and economy
workouts will take it up to as high as 90 percent in a few weeks.
Another useful, but not as accurate, way to determine your AT is to run
until the effort feels difficult and you are huffing and puffing too fast to talk
in anything but one-word sentences. Although this pace is uncomfortable,
you can sustain it for 2 to 3 miles (3.2 to 4.8 km). This is a rough estimate
of your pace and heart rate at your current AT.
With that description and the previous discussion in mind, take your
heart rate monitor out for a workout. Jog slowly for several minutes and
then pick up the pace while frequently monitoring your heart rate. Note
your heart rate when your perceived effort reaches the one-word-sentence
stage. For all practical purposes, this is your AT. Rest assured that your AT
--- PAGE 199 ---
is a fluid point along a continuum of beats per minute over a wide range and
that it reveals the shape you’re in. Your perception of the effort will stay the
same, but as you get in better shape, your heart rate will go higher while the
pace gets faster.
Once you have a reliable estimate of your MHR, you can determine your
training zones. Remember that training zones are sport specific, so they
vary between activities. Use your estimated MHR and the Appendix to
determine the beats per minute for each zone:
Long, endurance-building runs: 60–75% MHR
Easy, recovery jogs: 65–70% MHR
Maximal recovery and taper jogs: 60–65% MHR
Stamina runs: 75–85% MHR
Economy runs: 85–95% MHR
Speed and power runs: 95–100% MHR
Record your training zones based on these percentages and use them to
plan and monitor your training.
Choosing a Training Program
This section presents a set of idealized training programs that feature
workouts to develop all four components of fitness (endurance, stamina,
economy, and speed) and that progress through each of the four training
phases to safely develop those components. Level 1 is for joggers who wish
to build endurance and enjoy better health and weight control. Level 2
workouts develop endurance and stamina for recreational runners who wish
to finish 5Ks, 10Ks, half marathons, and full marathons, but not compete at
an elite level. Level 3 builds economy, speed, and power that is appropriate
for racing runners who aspire to compete against the clock to set personal
records and beat other competitors in 5Ks, 10Ks, half marathons, and full
marathons. Level 3 also features workouts to take racing runners down the
home stretch as fast as hungry cheetahs, helping them peak at the right time.
Level 1: Jogging to Build Endurance
--- PAGE 200 ---
It might appear a bit exaggerated, but the range of 60 percent MHR as your
lower target heart rate and 75 percent MHR as your upper limit is valid for
level 1. It’s true that the lower end is best for maintaining endurance and the
upper end is best for developing endurance. Slightly different benefits occur
at either end, and everything between is productive.
This program uses the scientific format of givens, or controls, and a
variable. In each progression, the stated duration of the workout and the
frequency of workouts in a week are givens. The most important given is
intensity in the form of the set of target heart rates. That allows you to track
your improving fitness by measuring how much distance you cover each
day as the variable. For example, if you use a running track, you might
cover only three or four laps during your first 30-minute workout. Three or
four weeks later, you might be able to complete five or six laps in 30
minutes because you can go longer before reaching your upper limit. You’ll
spend less time walking because your heart rate will drop faster into your
recovery zone.
If you prefer to run on the street instead of a track, use a landmark, such
as a neighbor’s mailbox, to note where you finish the first time. Soon you’ll
be going past that mailbox to the gas station on the corner. You could also
break the duration of the workout into half periods and then note how much
farther past the starting line you go as you return from the turnaround point
day after day, week after week.
The number of weeks it takes you to accomplish each progression is the
ending variable. In short, you are measuring both short- and long-term
improvements in your fitness.
Your jogging pace and how much walking you have to do to recover
once (and if) you exceed your upper heart rate limit will determine how
much distance you cover during the specified time. The beauty of using our
heartlek protocol is that you will answer the “What about me?” question
because the variable reflects your current level of fitness (refer to chapter 5
for more detail on heartlek).
Even if you are already doing what seems to be more mileage than is
covered in progression A, follow it as an introduction to using target heart
rate zones. If you are in better shape, you’ll simply graduate to progression
B sooner.