--- PAGE 44 ---
It’s true that someone not experienced with exhaustive levels of athletic
effort might not do well on a first max treadmill stress test. So the idea that
treadmill or bike testing for MHR is not a learned skill and takes no
experience is a myth. People often bail out long before they reach their true
maximum values because they don’t know how to endure the pain of full
fatigue or they simply are unfamiliar with this level of effort and are
uncomfortable with it. True MHR is not reached until the beats per minute
plateau and refuse to rise any higher no matter how much harder, faster, or
longer the subject moves. Most rookies have to survive several close
brushes with exhaustion before they realize how hard they can push
themselves and what levels of fatigue they can endure and live to tell about.
If you have suspicions about your MHR, keep trying by repeating the tests
we recommend, or checking your monitor at the end of really hard
workouts or races.
--- PAGE 45 ---
Even an endurance fitness test in a clinical setting may not accurately reveal true
maximum heart rate. Athletes have to push themselves until their heart rate plateaus,
which is beyond what many people can endure.
Myth 3: Getting a Real Maximum Effort
Doctors usually don’t like to stand around watching patients perform heroic
feats of athletic endurance during exercise stress tests. Because doctors are
in the business of detecting hidden heart disease, treadmill or bike cardiac
stress tests administered in a physician’s office are usually submaximal and
don’t reveal true MHR. Symptoms of coronary artery problems usually
surface once the subject reaches or slightly exceeds anaerobic threshold
(AT). Despite the fact that the anaerobic threshold is fitness dependent and
--- PAGE 46 ---
can be experienced by unfit folks at very low percentages of MHR, it is
expected by most doctors to be about 85 percent MHR. So once that effort
level is achieved, often the test is ended with the subject far short of that
real MHR. Furthermore, most physicians are not well educated in exercise
physiology and often naively use the age-adjusted formula for predicting
that target in the first place. (See the first myth for why this is not a good
idea.) If you are still suspicious about your real MHR, keep reading.
Myth 4: Applying Heart Rate Responses Across Exercise
Modes
Heart rate responses vary depending on work rate across exercise modes.
What this means is that a 60 percent MHR while running can feel
completely different than a 60 percent MHR while cycling or swimming.
Triathletes know this only too well. Heart rate varies as a function of many
variables; one is the number of active muscle contractions and whether you
are carrying your weight as in running, pushing it as in cycling, or pulling it
in a supported environment as in swimming. Therefore, multisport athletes
should have different heart rate values for different activities. Your
familiarity with an activity and the specificity of the activity affect your
heart rate response.
Determining Maximum Heart Rate
As you contemplate determining your true maximum heart rate, think back
to the information presented for myth 1. Make sure you have accurate data
based on you in your chosen activity. The sport-specific chapters provide
more relevant information on this topic, but we want to emphasize here how
important it is to have this information.
This section presents protocols for self-testing in running. (The protocols
for swimming, cycling, rowing, and cross-country skiing are in those
specific chapters.)
Not knowing your true MHR is the first error. If you don’t know your
actual MHR, you could be in exactly the same shape, have exactly the same
running ability, and be running the same pace as your training partner while
your respective heart rates are as much as 72 beats apart in extreme cases.
--- PAGE 47 ---
Remember what we said about comparing heart rates: Don’t do it.
Furthermore, be skeptical when using a monitor for the first time if the
numbers you’ve calculated from the predicted max formula don’t seem to
make sense. Take a treadmill stress test supervised by a physiologist or
physician who promises to take you to your maximum. Obviously, a testing
facility is the safest and most effective place to be tested for your MHR.
Some universities offer these services, as do higher-end sport clubs, sports
medicine clinics, and even some private practitioners. Cost ranges from
$100 to $350.
Choose where you get tested carefully. There is a lot of room for
interpretation and measurement error depending on the skill of the
technician. Look for certified technicians and exercise physiologists and not
a self-professed fitness enthusiast who took a weekend course and bought
some equipment. Simple testing protocols, such as the running test
described here, are useful for most people but may not tell the whole story,
depending on your level of fitness, skill, and mode of activity. If you
suspect your numbers aren’t right, try the tests in the programming
chapters. Before undergoing any testing, be sure to get the okay from your
doctor.
Sample Running Test for MHR
1. Find a running track or a small and gradual incline 400 to 600 meters
long. Put on your heart rate monitor.
2. Jog 0.5- to 1-mile (0.8 to 1.6 km) to warm-up.
3. Run one lap or one incline as fast as you can. Check and record your
heart rate at the end of the effort.
4. Take a 2-minute recovery walk or jog, and then repeat the run. Again,
check and record your heart rate when you finish.
5. Take a 2-minute recovery and repeat the run. Again, check and record
your heart rate when you finish. Your heart rate at the end of this third
trial will be a pretty good indicator of your maximum heart rate.
See also page 154 in chapter 10 for another option for self-testing MHR.
--- PAGE 48 ---
Calculating Target Heart Rate or
Heart Rate Training Zones
The level of stimulus to your organs affects their rate of adaptation. As you
might expect, lower-intensity activity has a different effect than higher-
intensity activity does. You have already come across the terms aerobic and
anaerobic in the previous chapter. Here we combine them with metabolism
to discuss aerobic and anaerobic energy systems. Think of aerobic and
anaerobic as synonymous with low intensity and high intensity.
These terms have several implications for training. How effectively you
develop these systems is of major importance in how you perform. For the
most part, the information in this book targets the endurance, or aerobic,
athlete. However, top-class endurance performances also depend heavily on
anaerobic energy. If peak performances are your objective, it would be a
fatal mistake to have a well-developed aerobic system without an
appropriately developed anaerobic system. Conversely, it usually is a
mistake to try anaerobic workouts without first developing a base of
endurance from aerobic training. One last point to remember: All recovery
is aerobic, so having a good aerobic base is important for all forms of
recovery.
You can also differentiate between aerobic and anaerobic work this way:
Lower-intensity, aerobic work at heart rates lower than 75 percent MHR
induces cardiovascular and body composition changes, whereas higher-
intensity, anaerobic work at heart rates greater than 80 percent induces more
neural, respiratory, and biochemical changes. Unfortunately, endurance
athletes often pay too much attention to long, slow aerobic miles and not
enough attention to the “bone crusher” anaerobic workouts, which is what
the Kenyans call their high-intensity track workouts. We’ll come back to
these issues later in the book.
Because the right intensity ensures the right adaptations, you need to not
only fully understand the reason for each target heart rate zone, but also
trust the accuracy of the numbers on your monitor. To ensure that your
workout meets its objective, and that the beats per minute on your monitor
make sense, we suggest that you match them with a backup system such as
a pace chart or a set of perceived exertions. Of course, the preferable way to
--- PAGE 49 ---
regulate intensity is to measure it objectively and reliably with your heart
rate monitor. Using pace charts implies that you have tested your level of
fitness with results from an all-out effort at a race. Measuring it subjectively
may take some experience, but it is a practical and easily learned method.
The Borg Scale of Perceived Exertion is the best subjective method and we
present an adapted version of this in the next couple of pages.
There are several methods of calculating target heart rate zones.
However, all use predictions for MHR, which we have pointed out can yield
varying results. We include them here so you can see how much room for
error there is when predicting. You can use these approaches, but we
suggest that you get an actual measurement (which we covered earlier).
These are the more common calculation methods:
Equation 1: 220 − age (years) = MHR
Equation 2: 210 − [0.5 × age (years)] = MHR
Equation 3: Karvonen formula
The Karvonen formula uses 220 − age (years) for MHR, but it doesn’t
stop there. Here is the full formula:
220 − age (years) = MHR
MHR − resting heart rate (RHR) = heart rate reserve (HRR)
Intensity = % × HRR + RHR
In recent years there has been speculation that MHR varies between men
and women. As science continues to explore this topic, there is a mixed
consensus on which gender has the higher MHR. The following formulas
are adjusted to accommodate this gender effect.
Equation 4 (males): 202 − [0.55 × age (years)]
Equation 5 (females): 216 − [1.09 × age (years)]
Note that age is the determining factor in all calculations. It is well
established that MHR declines with increasing age, and age alone is pretty
much the primary determining factor. However, like most physiological
variables, there is a high degree of individual variation. Consider the
following numbers based on calculating 70 to 80 percent training zones for
a 40-year-old with a resting heart rate of 65 bpm using each method.
Equation 1
220 − 40 (age in years) = 180 bpm
--- PAGE 50 ---
180 bpm (MHR) × 0.7 (70%) = 126; 180 bpm × 0.8 (80%) = 144
Training zone = 126 to 144 bpm
Equation 2
210 − 20 [0.5 × 40 (age in years)] = 190 bpm
190 bpm (MHR) × 0.7 (70%) = 133; 190 bpm × 0.8 (80%) = 152
Training zone = 133 to 152 bpm
Equation 3
220 − 40 (age in years) = 180 bpm
180 bpm (MHR) − 65 bpm (RHR) = 115 bpm (HRR)
0.7 (70%) × 115 bpm (HRR) + 65 bpm (RHR) = 145.5 bpm
0.8 (80%) × 115 bpm + 65 bpm = 157
Training zone = 145 to 157 bpm
Equation 4
202 − [0.55 × 40 (age in years)] = 202 − 22 = 180 bpm
Training zone = 126 to 144 bpm
Equation 5
216 − [1.09 × 40 (age in years)] = 216 − 43.6 = 172.4 bpm
Training zone = 121 to 138 bpm
Using these simple figures alone, we have up to a 17 percent variation in
the low-end exercise heart rate. For serious athletes, this is a huge
difference that will yield considerable variations in training outcomes. This
problem may be compounded if we are unsure about the correctness of any
of these numbers.
Note that the major limitation in all calculations is the absence of a true
measure of MHR. This is really what all athletes need individually and
should determine periodically during their training phases. Multisport
athletes should be measured for all sports because MHR varies according to
activity modes. This measurement does not require sophisticated equipment
but an accurately administered and progressive protocol that incrementally
exhausts the athlete in 12 to 15 minutes. This often requires a little
experience because if you fatigue too early or too late, you often don’t get
good data. Many facilities that offer these services do not understand proper
methodology and consequently generate inaccurate data, much to the
frustration of the client who then uses it for months without the desired
adaptations. You’ll need a heart rate monitor and the ability to record the
--- PAGE 51 ---
MHR you achieve during the session. (Typically it occurs as you become
exhausted.)
When we fitness test in the laboratory, we use a telemetry system that
allows us to constantly monitor the response and also relate the heart rate
response to workload, which could be wattage, speed, 500-meter splits, and
so on. This approach yields much greater accuracy than a traditional
prediction equation does.
Also, you need to be aware that a small spike in MHR often follows the
cessation of maximum exercise; this should not be considered a sustainable
MHR. This is another common mistake.
Remember that different modes of exercise yield different responses.
Running yields a higher MHR than cycling does for most people. However,
trained cyclists and rowers have higher MHRs in their chosen sports than
they have running. Therefore, rowers should perform this trial on rowing
ergometers or on the water. Cyclists should perform the trial on bikes; and
runners, on treadmills. Each athlete should have his or her own individually
measured MHR.
Research data show variations in calculated heart rates quite nicely as a
function of mode. They first showed the variation in MHR as a function of
mode and also that running produced MHR numbers close to the 220 − age
equation. The numbers generated on the treadmill were significantly
different from the numbers generated using other exercise modes. The
numbers generated during cycling were significantly less than predicted (on
average 18 bpm) and varied from −35 bpm to +16 bpm. Cycling data were
on average 96 percent of treadmill data. A meta-analysis by some authors
suggested that age accounted for about 75 percent of MHR variability, but
others have reported that age actually accounts for a lower percentage of the
variability. On average, the heart rate variability from age-predicted MHR is
±10 to 12 bpm.
Using the data from our earlier calculated example, we now see that a
40-year-old using a prediction equation could exercise anywhere from 121
to 145 bpm and assume it was 70 percent MHR. This is a large variation
and not altogether accurate. The take-home message is that many of us will
have an MHR that varies significantly from the predicted values, and if we
are using these equations, may be well off the mark. Therefore, a simple
--- PAGE 52 ---
approach to increase accuracy and reliability is to measure your own MHR
and then calculate your percentage of intensity using this real number.
Note: The determination of MHR requires a maximum effort and
therefore presents a potentially dangerous situation for certain people.
Consequently, qualified personnel should perform your testing.
Balancing Numbers With Common
Sense
The fallback method of gauging the intensity levels of your workouts
features the use of common sense in the form of subjectively perceived
exertion. You ask yourself, “How hard or easy does this feel?” A perceived
exertion scale was developed by scientist Gunnar Borg back in the early
1960s. Dr. Borg was actually more into psychosomatic research and was
interested in developing a feeling scale that could in some way be
quantified. He developed the Rating of Perceived Exertion (RPE) chart. The
original scale ran from 6 to 20 with verbal cues describing perceived
exertion on the odd numbers (for example, a perceived exertion of 7 is very,
very light; a perceived exertion of 11 is fairly light; and a perceived exertion
of 19 is very, very hard). The scale has undergone several editions since the
early work of Dr. Borg.
Thanks to Dr. Borg’s example, Coach Benson has created a similar scale
that directly converts perceived effort into percentages of your MHR. Our
version, depicted in table 2.1, uses extensive verbal cues to describe what it
feels like to go from easy at 60 percent all the way to all out at 100 percent.
While running is used as an example here, the scale could be used with any
activity or sport.
TABLE 2.1 Coach Benson’s Workouts and Perceived Effort
Chart
Training
Workout Perceived effort (i.e., feels like) phases
1 Slow slogging at 60–65%. So easy that it’s somewhat awkward to III and IV
Maintains endurance while jog so slow. Hard to work up a sweat.
--- PAGE 53 ---
getting maximum recovery
before race.
2 Just jogging at 65–70%. Can work up a sweat. You can carry on a I–IV
Allows muscle to replete full conversation. It’s a fast jog that won’t
glycogen by burning mainly tire you.
fats.
3 Loping long and easy at 70– Still a slow run. Still easy to talk. If you do I–III
75%. Develops and long distances, you may need a nap.
maintains local muscle
endurance and mental
patience.
4 Striding steadily at 75–80%. Faster pace but easy enough to sustain II and III
Prepares muscles and for a long distance. You breathe heavier.
respiratory system for Talking is now in half sentences. This is
transition from aerobic to your half marathon pace.
anaerobic work.
5 Running rapidly at 80–85%. Harder running and breathing. You can II and III
Improves anaerobic only talk in single words and short
threshold. sentences. At 30 seconds slower than 5K
race pace, it’s uncomfortable but
sustainable for 3–4 miles.
6 Determined dashing at 85– Very fast but not all out. No talking here. III and IV
95%. Increases O max and It takes a conscious effort to run this fast.
2
However, you still have a little kick left.
self-discipline to not go all
out in practice.
7 Serious sprinting at 95– Faster than race pace. Legs are heavy. IV
100% of O max. Improves Close to full sprint speed. It’s over so
2
quickly that your heart rate lags behind.
lactic acid tolerance. Very
Only doable for short distances.
tough mentally.
Benson’s Perceived Effort scale has increased usefulness for people
whose heart rates vary significantly from the norm and when target heart
rates don’t seem to match the effort described. Common sense must
overrule numbers calculated as MHR that were predicted instead of tested.
Do not hesitate to add or subtract several beats per minute to your target
heart rate until you get comfortable with the relationship between bpm and
how things feel.
Whether you use the Benson table or one of Borg’s charts, combining
the common sense of feeling your exertion and effort with your heart rate
--- PAGE 54 ---
will allow you both intuitively and objectively to select the right intensity to
meet your exercise goal. Eventually, you’ll be able to say fairly accurately
what your heart rate is, based solely on how you feel. One final point about
using this combination method: On days when the conditions of your
workout are not normal (e.g., you’re still not recovered or it’s really humid
and warm), the perception approach can be used to reinforce the accuracy
of the higher-than-normal heart rates on your heart rate monitor, allowing
you to make sensible adjustments to your workout volume and intensity.
Factors Affecting Heart Rate at Rest
and During Exercise
One of the most valuable long-term pieces of information you can gather is
resting heart rate. When you wake up each morning, take a minute to get an
accurate resting heart rate and keep a log. You’ll find this an invaluable
tool, providing feedback on injury, illness, overtraining, stress, incomplete
recovery, and so on. It is also a simple gauge of improvements in fitness.
We know athletes who have gathered resting heart rate data for years and in
a day or two can identify a 1 or 2 bpm elevation that precedes an illness or a
bonk session. Some newer heart rate monitors have the capacity for 24-hour
monitoring, which we’ll discuss more in chapter 3.
Several factors affect heart rate at rest and during exercise. In general,
the main factors affecting heart rate at rest are level of fitness and state of
recovery. Gender also is suggested to play a role, albeit inconsistently. In
general, fitter people tend to have lower resting heart rates. Some great
athletes of the past have recorded remarkably low resting heart rates. For
example, Miguel Indurain, five-time winner of the Tour de France, reported
a resting heart rate of only 28 bpm. The reason for this is that, with
appropriate training, the heart muscle increases in both size and strength.
The stronger heart moves more blood with each beat (this is called stroke
volume) and therefore can do the same amount of work with fewer beats.
As you get fitter, your resting heart rate should get lower.
The second main factor affecting resting heart rate is state of recovery.
After exercise, particularly after a long run or bike ride, several things
happen in the body. Fuel sources are depleted, body temperature is elevated,
--- PAGE 55 ---
and muscles are damaged. All of these factors must be addressed and
corrected. The body has to work harder, and this increased work results in a
higher heart rate. Even though you might feel okay at rest, your body is
working harder to repair itself, and you’ll notice an elevated heart rate.
Monitoring your resting heart rate and your exercise heart rate will allow
you to make appropriate adjustments such as eating or hydrating better or
taking a day off when your rate is elevated.
These factors of recovery and injury also affect heart rate during
exercise. The factors that elevate resting heart rate also elevate exercise
heart rate. If you’re not fully recovered from a previous workout, you might
notice, for example, at your usual steady-state pace, an exercise heart rate
that is 5 to 10 bpm higher than normal. This is usually accompanied by a
rapidly increasing heart rate throughout the exercise session.
An extremely important factor affecting exercise heart rate is
temperature. Warmer temperatures cause the heart to beat faster and place
considerable strain on the body. Simply put, when it is hot, the body must
move more blood to the skin to cool itself while also maintaining blood
flow to the muscles. The only way to do both of these things is to increase
overall blood flow, which means that the heart must beat faster. Depending
on how fit you are and how hot it is, this might mean a heart rate that is 20
to 40 bpm higher than normal. Fluid intake is important under these
conditions. Sweating changes blood volume, which eventually can cause
cardiac problems. The simplest and most effective intervention to address
high temperature and heart rate is regular fluid intake. The average-size
adult’s stomach has the ability to absorb 6 to 8 ounces (0.17-0.24 L) of
water (a swallow usually equals an ounce) every 15 to 20 minutes. Keep
this little pearl in mind so you don’t drink too often and fill your stomach to
the point that it inhibits your breathing capacity. Stomach cramps, anyone?
This helps to preserve the blood volume and prevent the heart from beating
faster and faster.
Another important factor affecting exercise heart rate is age. In general,
MHR will decline by about one beat per year starting at around 20 years
old. Interestingly, resting heart rate is not affected. This is why the basic
prediction equation of 220 − age has an age correction factor. As a side
note, this decrease in MHR often is used to explain decreases in O max
2
--- PAGE 56 ---
and endurance performance with increasing age, because the number of
times the heart beats in a minute affects how much blood is moved and
available to the muscles. We have coached and tested thousands of athletes,
and the general trend is that athletes of the same age who produce higher
heart rates often have higher fitness scores. However, your MHR is what it
is, and you cannot change it. Don’t obsess over it.
A final factor is gender. Recent studies have suggested a variation in
MHR between males and females. However, the data are inconclusive with
the calculations resulting in lower MHRs for males versus females of the
same age, while anecdotal reports suggest that the MHRs are higher in
males. In general, females have smaller hearts and smaller muscles overall
than males. Both of these factors would support the conclusion of a higher
MHR in females, certainly at the same workload. We have to conclude that
the jury is still out on the gender effect.
Chapter 3 considers possible sources of mechanical interference that
cause irregular and incorrect readings. However, during exercise, several
conditions can develop, often as a result of environmental factors that have
a paradoxical but real effect on heart rate. Let’s look more specifically at
some of these.
Atrial Fibrillation
One medical condition that may cause heart rate irregularity is atrial
fibrillation. Although it happens rarely, electrolytes (minerals in the blood
that help regulate the contraction and relaxation of muscles) can be out of
balance enough to cause atrial fibrillation, an arrhythmia of the receiving
chambers of the heart. This is not immediately life threatening. But, because
A-fib is a serious condition, if your numbers are erratic, you should be
tested by a cardiologist to determine whether you have this condition.
Typically, people with A-fib have numbers skipping wildly and ranging
as much as 30 to 70 bpm higher than expected at a given intensity. They
also feel a little faint, weak, and short of breath. If your receiver has the
little silhouette of a heart that flashes on and off, study it for a minute or so.
If you notice pauses and then several quick flashes of the heart in a row,
you should see a physician for a checkup. We’ve seen, however, several
cases of dehydrated runners with A-fib cured quickly by Gatorade, Dr.
--- PAGE 57 ---
Cade’s wonderful over-the-counter prescription for fluid and electrolyte
imbalance.
Atrial fibrillation is one of the more extreme and concerning situations.
Most sources of interference can be easily traced to one of the other factors
addressed in the following sections.
Cardiac Creep
The technical term for this condition is cardiovascular drift. In warm, hot,
humid weather and even in cold temperatures if you are wildly overdressed,
heart rate can easily climb above the upper target limits of your aerobic
training zones without a (perceived) increase in effort. At and above
anaerobic threshold levels, this cardiac creep will occur more quickly as
your heart finds it difficult to deliver the needed oxygen as fast as it is
needed by the muscles while at the same time body temperature is also
increasing. Recent studies have shown that this is not just a simple increase
in beats per minute caused by the heart having to work harder as it pushes
more blood to the skin to cool the body through sweating. This subtle,
gradual increase also reflects an actual decrease in blood volume as water is
lost through sweat. With a decreased volume of blood coursing through the
vascular system, the heart has to compensate by contracting faster.
Cardiac creep (see figure 2.1) is a good example of the effect of blood
volume on the bpm of the heart. When blood volume is normal, resting and
exercise heart rates also will be normal. We know that you can’t rehydrate
with water or sport fluids as fast as you can become dehydrated. (Adults
can digest and absorb only 6 to 8 ounces [0.17-0.24 L] of water every 15 to
20 minutes [about 24 ounces, or 0.7 liters, in an hour] whereas a well-
trained, vigorously exercising person can lose 40 to 50 ounces [1.2-1.5 L]
of water per hour.) To make up for the diminishing amount of blood
returning to the heart, the heart rate simply increases. Now we don’t want to
overstate the obvious, but in warm conditions adequate fluid replacement
helps to preserve blood volume and also keep heart rate lower.
Our main point is this: The increase in heart rate can be independent of
the effort skeletal muscles are making. A slow, steady increase in heart rate
while you are keeping the work rate absolutely constant doesn’t necessarily
mean that you are working harder and that you should therefore ease up or
--- PAGE 58 ---
slow down. What you are trying to measure by checking your heart rate is
how much oxygen the working muscles require. What you want to know is
how hard your body is working, not just how fast your heart is beating. In
warm and humid conditions, during longer but easy to barely moderate
efforts, a creeping heart rate probably is creating false feedback. If the effort
honestly feels the same, but your heart rate has drifted up over your easy-
day target by 10 to 15 bpm, you are experiencing cardiac creep.
FIGURE 2.1 Changes in heart rate response over time at a fixed workload.
On the other hand, hard workouts in warm, humid weather that are
planned to take you to or above your anaerobic threshold are not going to
be as fast as planned. Once this increase in heart rate cannot keep up with
the rapidly diminishing blood volume, your performance will decrease.
Your availability of oxygen decreases, causing the muscles to start
producing more lactic acid. Now your muscles tighten up and refuse to
relax and stretch easily through the range of motion you were enjoying.
Slowing down is inevitable as you try to get closer to an aerobically
sustainable pace. Now you know why world distance records aren’t set on
hot days.
This situation is likely to happen only a few times when you are initially
exposed to warmer temperatures. We often see it happen in runs and races
early in the months of spring when we haven’t seen warm temperatures for
a while. After two or three weeks of exposure to the warmer temperatures,
we tend to see less cardiac creep.
--- PAGE 59 ---
Cardiac Crimp
The converse of cardiac creep is cardiac crimp. On cool days with low
humidity when you are supposed to be taking it slow and easy, you can be
fooled into allowing low numbers to give you permission to go much faster,
and hence much harder, than you should. Don’t fall for this. Use your sense
of perceived exertion to keep your pace slow and easy. In fact, if the
purpose of the workout is recovery, your bpm can never be too low.
Celebrate easy effort and low numbers as you think about what happens on
hard days. Cool, dry weather results in low heart rates because you are not
losing blood volume and you are also cooling effectively as a result of the
low humidity. Think about those workouts on early spring or fall mornings.
These conditions are perfect for great personal records. You could say that
no sweat equals world records and personal records.
Effects of Medications
The importance of getting individualized heart rate data that accurately
reflects your current fitness state is crucial. Therefore, we want to make
sure that you understand how some common medications affect heart rate.
Many people use prescription medications over the long term to treat a
chronic medical condition such as asthma, high blood pressure, or a more
specific heart condition and, therefore, take them every day. In this instance,
testing needs to be performed under the medicated condition, because that
is the normal state. Many people also use medications to treat acute
conditions such as allergies, colds, headaches, and so on. When using
medications for those conditions, delay self-testing until the medications
have cleared your system.
TABLE 2.2 Effects of Commonly Used Medications on Resting
and Exercise Heart Rate
Condition Medication Heart rate effect*
Asthma Inhalers, anti-inflammatories Acute increase
Common cold and OTC decongestants, Palpitations, irregular, increase,
headache pseudoephedrine, decrease
acetaminophen
--- PAGE 60 ---
Arthritis Anti-inflammatories Increase, increased blood
pressure
High blood pressure Beta-blockers Decreases heart rates to keep
heart muscles from working too
hard
Cardiac conditions Multiple drugs, depending on Increase, decrease
condition
Bacterial illness Antibiotics Most likely increase or no
change
Antidepressants Norepinephrine inhibitors Likely increase
Diabetes Insulin Acute increase
*These are the common heart rate effects. Effects vary significantly, and people using a medication should consult with
their doctor about use during exercise. In addition to the above medical conditions, supplements such as vitamins,
minerals, and herbs might affect your heart rate.
Table 2.2 presents some of the more commonly used over-the-counter
(OTC) and prescribed medications that can affect your heart rate.
Lead (Heavy) Legs
You go out for a run without realizing that you are not recovered, or worse,
are starting to become overtrained. You start moving along and quickly
perceive the effort to be pretty hard. You check your receiver for validation,
expecting to see a high number, but your heart rate is surprisingly low. Next
you check your pace, and it’s also surprisingly slow.
In this scenario, the fact is that your muscles simply don’t have enough
energy to move you as fast as you expect and they have microdamage. Slow
pace equals low heart rate despite your perception of hard effort. So take the
day off. Return home and rest. Eat more wisely and drink more profusely.
This is not the time to be stubbornly heroic and continue to push through
the rest of the workout.
The exercise heart rate response in this mildly overtrained or
unrecovered state is best used in conjunction with a waking morning heart
rate. If you are indeed not recovered, you should notice two things: an
elevated heart rate upon waking and a decreased heart rate during exercise.
Remember, with heart rate training, it’s your body, not your mind, that you
want to train. The mental toughening needs to be done on days when you
--- PAGE 61 ---
are well rested and can go fast until you drop from exhaustion. Fast times in
practice on hard days build confidence as well as improve fitness. If you are
a veteran, keep in mind that the best places for fast, hard efforts are races. If
you are a rookie, all-out workouts are probably necessary to help you learn
what drop-dead exhaustion feels like.
Emotional and Hormonal Changes
We have all felt that racing heart rate in anticipation of a race or
competition. In this situation the increase in heart rate is mediated by
hormonal responses, primarily adrenaline released as a result of
nervousness or excitement. Such elevations in heart rate are confusing and
can be difficult to deal with in these situations. You must be alert to this
effect and implement strategies such as following a certain warm-up or
using breathing exercises or relaxation to control your heart rate response.
If adrenaline is increasing your heart rate, your heart rate is not reliable for
guiding your effort. This tends to improve with practice but generally will
settle to normal within 5 to 7 minutes of exercise.
Recommendations for Evaluating
and Revising Zones
By now you know what you need to perform calculations and determine
your training zones. You know the factors that will influence your numbers
either artificially or because of anatomical or biochemical adaptations.
Artificial factors generally go away on their own, but you need to pay
attention to the anatomical and biochemical ones because they require that
you recalculate some numbers.
Remember that the purpose of training is to induce adaptations in your
cardiovascular, respiratory, and musculoskeletal systems. Some of the
changes you want to see are a decrease in your resting heart rate, a decrease
in your exercise heart rate at a fixed load, and an increase in your heart rate
at anaerobic threshold. The change in resting heart rate is easily explained:
The heart is bigger and stronger and can pump more blood with each beat,
allowing it to beat slower within a given time frame. This factor also
explains why the heart rate is lower at a given workload after training.
--- PAGE 62 ---
These changes don’t necessarily require recalculations because, to produce
heart rates in a given zone, you’ll have to move faster and faster, which is
exactly what you want.
The number that will need continual monitoring is the heart rate at
anaerobic threshold. If all goes according to plan, this heart rate number
will increase (e.g., from 145 to 155 bpm) allowing you to move at a faster
speed without putting yourself under additional metabolic stress, such as
increased lactic acid. You are now a faster, more efficient machine. This
self-correction is the beauty of heart rate training. Keeping track of your
workouts in a daily logbook and also including both resting and exercise
heart rates (along with paces you ran) will allow you to see your progress in
several areas. You’ll see your heart rate response to a given workload or
speed decrease over time, you’ll see your speed at a given heart rate
increase over time, and finally, you’ll see a decrease in your resting heart
rate. Self-testing every 10 to 12 weeks will allow you to confirm this
information and document the changes.
After 12 to 16 weeks of training, you should notice the following:
You are moving at a much faster speed, but at the same level of effort
and heart rate.
You have improved your anaerobic threshold at a higher heart rate, but
at the same perceived effort.
You are eliciting a lower heart rate at any given submaximal speed.
In general, we recommend that you revisit your heart rate data every six
weeks, especially with an increase in mileage or intensity. This goes back to
good record keeping. Keeping an accurate morning heart rate and exercise
log will be a great help as you plan and monitor your fitness programs.
--- PAGE 63 ---
CHAPTER 3
Getting the Most From Your
Monitor
I
ncorrect heart rate information can come from two sources. The first is
incorrect training zone numbers. This might be the case if your
predicted maximum heart rate (MHR) is different from your actual MHR.
Also, the monitor itself may be displaying erroneous numbers because of
poor contact or another technical problem. Awareness of the origin of the
error usually leads to an easy fix. This book mostly addresses using your
heart rate to optimize training; however, you need to be sure that the data
you get from your monitor are accurate.
Watching Your Numbers
As you learned in chapter 1, using heart rate to guide your training is a
sound, scientific way to ensure that you train at the right intensity at the
right time. It is also time efficient, helping you avoid the garbage work you
don’t need so you can meet the objective of your workout. Much of this
chapter is devoted to making sure that you don’t waste time blindly staying
in heart rate zones that aren’t effective or valid.
Before relying on your heart rate monitor, take it out for a trial workout
to get a rough idea of how it works and the sort of feedback it gives you.
Before using it for another workout, closely study the information in this
--- PAGE 64 ---
chapter and chapter 2 to guarantee that you are using your monitor
correctly.
In this chapter, we will also discuss the newer wrist and chest monitors.
While both offer reliable and accurate numbers, we want to point out
differences in what is being measured. Wrist monitors measure the
differences in the density of your red blood cells as they pass under the
LED lights on the back of the watch. With the contraction and relaxation of
your heart muscles, your red blood cell volume is more or less dense and
these changes can be detected by the monitor. With the proliferation of
activity tracking wristbands, our informal surveys convince us that you will
need a fairly high-end model to guarantee reliability of the unit. Chest strap
monitors measure the electrical activity of the contracting cardiac muscles
in order to count the rate of the beats. We have more confidence in the chest
strap systems.
The first thing you want to do is ensure that your monitor is fitted
correctly. Wrist-reading monitors need to be especially tight during
workouts, even to the point of discomfort. Using a wrist monitor throughout
the day as a watch requires that you loosen it a bit in order to be
comfortable. If you use a chest strap, make sure it has good contact with
your skin by holding the rubber transmitter section with the electrodes tight
on your chest just below your chest muscles (it needs to fit snugly). With
your free hand, bring the elastic strap from behind your back and around
your other side, without stretching the elastic material, to within 6 inches
(15 cm) of the free end of the transmitter section. If the elastic strap is too
far away or too close, adjust it through the slide until you have that crucial
6-inch (15 cm) gap between the ends of the chest unit. Now pull and stretch
the elastic strap until you can clip the end into the transmitter section. It
should feel snug, but not so tight that it restricts the expansion of your rib
cage as you inhale. If the strap is too loose, the transmitter unit will slip up
and down on your skin and create friction that will result in phony numbers
being sent to your wrist receiver and this will only get worse during
exercise. It is a good idea to moisten the grooved electrodes to start the
conduction of the electrical activity of your heart contractions. If you use a
chest monitor, when you strap on the transmitter and do not see a reading
on the receiver, the electrodes are probably not in solid contact with your
skin. Wet your finger with water or saliva and moisten the electrodes. Or
--- PAGE 65 ---
just start working out and, as soon as you sweat, the readings should
normalize and appear. If your numbers on a wrist reader don’t make sense,
simply tighten the strap so there is no movement between the watch and
your skin.
Now, go for a nice 20- to 30-minute comfortable walk or jog at a
conversational pace. Observe the heart rate numbers and mentally note
them along with how you feel. If your monitor can record split times, press
the button at random times while walking or jogging. Do not be afraid to
increase and decrease your speed randomly during the run to ensure you see
those changes in heart rate.
--- PAGE 66 ---
To get the most from your heart rate monitor, attach it correctly, use it frequently, and
understand its strengths and limitations.
When you finish, hit the recall functions and get the high and low
numbers and the average heart rate for the session. Write them down, along
with a verbal description of the effort you felt at those recorded points (e.g.,
light, very light, somewhat hard).
The heart rate monitor is a machine, and like all machines, it can be a bit
temperamental. To use it properly, you need to be aware of the factors that
affect the monitor, the heart rate response, and ultimately the information
from the monitor. Chapter 2 covered specific issues that affect heart rate
zones and readings. You should not proceed if you have not resolved these
issues to your satisfaction. However, other conditions can cause your
monitor to display results that appear to be anomalies, contradictions, and
paradoxes. Before you send it to the repair shop, closely review the
information in this chapter. Almost all the brands and models of heart rate
monitors we have used are reliable and accurate. Therefore, when your
numbers seem to make no sense, your best action is to check out the
conditions and situations discussed in this chapter. You are most likely
getting false readings, and this can be easily corrected.
As you learned in chapter 1, individualizing your target heart rate zones
to fit the objectives of your workouts is as important and challenging as
individualizing your workouts to suit yourself. Once you know for sure
what your MHR is, and once you have carefully calculated your target heart
rate zones for each of the workouts you want to do, then read on. If you
strap on your monitor and go without knowing what the numbers should be
telling you, you’ll get frustrated. Please don’t give up on this investment. It
may take longer than you expected to get started, but without doing this
work now, our answer to your question “What about me?” will not make
sense.
The following are warnings about contradictory and paradoxical
numbers that could cause you to sprint when you should jog, put the brakes
on when you should pedal harder, or think that your irregular pulse must
surely be a heart attack. By understanding the physical or mechanical
causes of these numbers, you’ll know that you can just relax while using the
--- PAGE 67 ---
common sense of perceived exertion to figure out whether what you’re
seeing is valid.
Technical Difficulties That Cause
Irregular Numbers
Several conditions may cause your heart rate numbers to skip all over the
place. Normally, you will notice a steady increase or decrease in your heart
rate that will pretty much match your effort. The chest monitor is not an
electrocardiogram (ECG). However, it does use the electrical activity of the
heart to give you a signal. Therefore, any time an irregularity occurs in the
signal, it will be reflected in the heart rate number displayed. The following
are examples of what might lead to erroneous numbers.
Slippage
One cause of irregular readings is a loose chest strap that allows the
electrodes to slip and slide on the skin, causing a loss of signal. This
interferes with the transmitting of the electrical impulses of the heart muscle
to the chest strap. In this case, you need to shorten the elastic strap. If you
have a very small rib cage and narrow chest, just tighten the strap well past
the halfway point to achieve the 6-inch (15 cm) gap even if it means that the
extra material loops down. Put a safety pin in front of the slide to keep the
strap from slipping back to the original halfway position. If this is a
consistent problem, buy a shorter strap or permanently shorten your strap
by putting a few stitches into it to hold it in the shortened position. Straps
stretch over time and become loose. When this happens, we recommend
buying a new strap. The same goes for wrist straps as the band material
ages. In fact, keeping it tight enough may make the material start to stretch
away from the housing of the watch. Eventually this could cause the watch
to literally fall out of the strap, in which case you will want to replace the
strap.
Static Cling on Clothing
One cause of irregular readings is the type of clothing worn over the chest
transmitter. Shirts still charged with static electricity from the dryer can
--- PAGE 68 ---
confuse the receiver. Nylon wind jackets can generate static electricity that
also can interfere with the transmission from the chest strap to the receiver,
although this is more likely to be a concern in dry or cold climates. Usually,
sweat takes care of it pretty quickly. Females may find that underwire bras
can be a source of interference. If you suspect that static cling is causing the
problem, wet your hand and wipe it across the material in front of the
transmitter, or just wait until you’ve run far enough for sweat to drain off
the static. (This should take 8 to 10 minutes.) The signal is also transmitted
better and stronger once you start to sweat.
Interference From Cross-Feeds
Cross-feed occurs when your chest monitor receives information from the
transmitter of the person next to you. The solution may be to find a partner
who isn’t as scientific as you are (and therefore does not wear a monitor). If
not, arrange yourselves so that you are both wearing your receivers on your
outside arms. More advanced (and expensive) monitors have their own
embedded codes to prevent cross-feeds. Typically, this is more of a problem
in gym settings where treadmills and machines are closer together.
If you’re a real techno geek, you may have other devices that are
confusing your heart rate signal. When testing in the lab, we have seen
devices such as pedometers and GPS systems interfere with the heart rate
monitor signal. This is also the case when exercising indoors on a stationary
piece of equipment with lots of information displayed on the console. In
this case, either exercise outside for a change or take the receiver off your
wrist and strap it to a lower part of the machine out of range of the console.
Soaked Shirts
Shirts soaked with sweat can get heavy enough to bounce up and down in
front of your chest transmitter and interfere with the signal to your receiver.
If it is that hot and humid, remove the chest strap from under your shirt and
refasten it on top of the wet shirt just below your chest muscles. The wet
shirt will still allow the electrodes to have great contact with skin and be
able to pick up the electrical activity of your heart muscles. In fact, this is
also the solution if you experience chaffing from a strap that seems to slip
--- PAGE 69 ---
up and down on your skin. Just wet your shirt first before starting the
workout.
Safety Alarms
Radio frequency alarm systems installed in buildings can occasionally
interfere with your monitor’s own radio frequency as you go past. The
solution: Ignore them and keep going. The goofy numbers will return to
normal as soon as you are out of range of the alarm system.
New Technology
Heart rate monitor capacities have advanced dramatically in the last several
years. They have improved in function, appearance, reliability, and
accuracy. The new generation of wrist-reading monitors has proven reliable
for the most part, and so much more practical than the chest strap systems.
Modern monitors provide basic information on calorie expenditure, oxygen
consumption, time in target zones, average and maximum heart rates
achieved during the workout, and time in heart rate recovery zones, as well
as offering audible signals, 24-hour heart rate measurements, and a whole
lot more. All this information can be easily recorded and stored on your
smartphone for later analysis, allowing you to fine-tune and individualize
your program to a greater degree than ever before. This info can be
downloaded and stored on your computer as well. You can also compare
your heart rate response from day to day. If these workouts are at the same
speed, you will be able to see your training heart rate response over time
(i.e., Your heart rate should decrease when working at the same speed as
you get fitter). The recordable and downloadable features allow you to see
your daily data on a spreadsheet. When viewing your changes over time on
this single spreadsheet, the data can greatly reinforce your determination to
train smartly.
Data on calories expended, which is indirectly calculated from heart rate,
is a helpful feature because it expands the use of the monitor to people who
are less performance oriented and more interested in issues such as health
improvement, weight loss, and cardiac rehabilitation. Often people will
have a distinct caloric expenditure target per day or week that translates into
--- PAGE 70 ---
weight or fat loss. For example, it is common to use the basic value that you
must burn 3,500 calories to lose one pound (0.5 kg) of fat. Therefore,
burning 500 additional calories per day through exercise equates to roughly
one pound of fat loss per week.
For athletes, the 24-hour monitoring option provides an abundance of
new information they can use to fine-tune their programs and monitor their
intensity levels. This fairly convenient system tracks not only exercise heart
rates but also recovery rates. This provides vital information related to
adaptation and recovery. By tracking the heart rate over 24 hours, athletes
get thousands of data points that are downloadable to a computer to create a
graph or spreadsheet. These data can reveal not only the slightest signs of
illness, overtraining, and fatigue, but also improvement in fitness levels.
Having this data can allow an athlete to compare morning resting heart rates
over time and potentially even detect early signs of overtraining or illness
before it progresses too far.
Of course, with increased function comes increased complexity and cost.
However, spending a little time with the owner’s manual will resolve most
operating concerns, and ensuring that the watch is properly set up and
programmed from the outset will result in much greater accuracy. Many
features are downloadable with the more advanced systems. Being able to
download and observe the heart rate responses to a single exercise session
(or multiple sessions) is invaluable. You can look back at particular times of
a workout or a hill or a longer workout and detect where your creep set in,
an entertaining way to distract yourself during longer workouts.
Deciding which heart rate monitor to buy is a matter of personal choice.
Factors that will influence your decision include cost, your goals, your
fitness level, and the amount of information you need. The more serious and
competitive you are, the more features you’ll want. Features such as 24-
hour monitoring, caloric expenditure, and target zone audible alarm signals
can increase the accuracy and individualization of your training program.
Many heart rate monitor company websites provide sheets that compare
their models to their competitors to allow you to see at a glance the different
features of the models.
A final consideration when purchasing your heart rate monitor is that
some companies make models with additional features that span different
sports. For example, if you are a triathlete, you may want a heart rate