--- PAGE 35 ---
Chapter 3
Go Beyond
the Basics
It’s no secret that training big core lifts like the front squat and sumo
stance deadlift will produce delayed training effects; more importantly,
because the range of motion (ROM) is significant with these lifts, the
hormonal response in the body is also significant. We are going to
address hormonal response and cover a variety of strength training
methods, including the repeated effort method, the maximal effort (ME)
method, the submaximal effort method, and the dynamic effort (DE)
method, as well as general physical preparedness (GPP) work. You will
see throughout this book that being aware of the adaptations that take
place from each method, the demand on the nervous system from each
method, and the overall goal for each method is critical to designing
effective training programs that are balanced and thorough.
It’s common for individuals to attempt the “next best thing” instead of
adhering to tried-and-true methods that have been around for decades.
It’s also important to note that not all methods have the same intent and
each method has a specific place and desired stimulus—you will notice
how synergy can be created by using opposing methods. The benefits
of blending opposing methods are twofold: (1) variability in bar velocity
(bar speed), which utilizes both the force and velocity components of the
force-velocity curve to create different training effects and neurological
adaptations (Haff and Bompa 2009); and (2) the ability to prevent
overtraining. Favoring one method over others presents challenges in
terms of motor recruitment and, more importantly, risks overuse injuries
and overtraining (e.g., performing ME training too often only utilizes
the force component of strength training and does not present differing
demands on the CNS). In short, each method described will serve a
specific and unique purpose for you, and while not all methods need to
19
--- PAGE 36 ---
20 Lower Body Training
The Force-Velocity Curve
When different strength development methods are used, there
is more potential for altering the force-velocity curve. The force-
velocity curve examines the
interactions between force and
velocity and suggests there is
an inverse relationship: when
external resistance increases,
movement velocity decreases
(maximal effort work); and
when external resistance
decreases, movement velocity
increases (Haff and Bompa
2009). See figure for an
Velocity
example of the force-velocity
curve.
E8335/Brown/F10.01/678853/mh-R3
be used simultaneously, you will learn how to balance your plan of attack
by working both ends of the force-velocity curve.
HORMONAL RESPONSES OF STRENGTH
TRAINING
The benefits of effective lower limb training extend to optimal hormone
production because the lower body represents the largest muscle groups
in the body that signal the growth hormone insulin-like growth factor 1
(IGF-1) and serum testosterone. It’s been widely established that long-
term heavy resistance training can bring about significant increases of
muscle size, strength, and power. These increases can boost hormonal
interactions, and the type of exercise is a major player in how big the
hormonal response is. Because heavy compound movements like squats
and deadlifts require high levels of motor-unit recruitment, they activate
androgen receptors for anabolic hormones such as testosterone. The
inflammatory response to skeletal muscle damage causes remodeling to
take place and consequently new growth to occur. Moreover, long-term
training effects from heavy lower body resistance exercises can result
in adaptations in the endocrine system, thus creating an environment
in the human body that is suited for transport of anabolic hormones.
ecroF
Maximal strength
Strength speed
Power
Speed strength
Speed
Force-velocity curve.
--- PAGE 37 ---
Go Beyond the Basics 21
Therefore, heavy resistance training is a requisite for creating an anabolic
environment in the human body that is more capable of gaining lean
tissue; and gains in lean tissue are closely related to gains in maximal
strength because cell size and volume are synonymous with improved
motor-unit recruitment (Kraemer, Vingren, and Spiering 2016).
While you don’t need to be an exercise physiologist to understand
the positive effect strength training produces with regard to anabolic
(muscle-building) hormones, it is important to have a baseline level of
knowledge about the training effects of lower body training. It seems
logical that the largest muscles in the human body are going to facilitate
spikes in hormones that involve building strength and muscle mass.
There are a couple things to consider in addition to the roles of IGF-1,
growth hormone, testosterone, and insulin. The first thing is your training
age or the total amount of time you’ve spent performing resistance training
because this can dictate improvements that take place from a neural
standpoint; there is more to the picture than just hormonal response. For
instance, it is common for beginners just starting strength training to see
improvement in strength before seeing large gains in muscle hypertrophy.
Beginner-level individuals may add 40 to 50 pounds (18 to 23 kg) to their
squat and deadlift in as little as 16 weeks owing to neural adaptations that
take place upon initial exposure to strength training.
Over the course of your first 8 to 12 weeks of a strength training
program, you typically see a much faster rate of strength improvement
due to direct factors relating to the nervous system, such as:
• Increased neural drive
• Increased neural coordination
• Increased motor-unit synchronization
These physiological changes (among many others) allow a beginner to
recruit more high-threshold motor units, leading to an increase in type
II muscle fiber activation. Not only can an individual recruit more high-
threshold motor units, but the firing rate (rate coding) may also become
more synchronous with other high-threshold motor units, which will affect
the onset of discharge and therefore improve the rate of force development
(RFD). This increase in RFD means an athlete requires a shorter time to
reach maximal force (this helps translate to explosive movements). After
the initial 8 to 12 weeks, increase in muscle hypertrophy becomes a more
important factor, further increasing maximal strength (Schoenfeld 2021).
In short, while strength training has positive effects on anabolic hormone
production, this is only one piece of the puzzle; it is important to understand
that this process is multifaceted and very much dictated by your overall
training experience (or lack of experience).
--- PAGE 38 ---
22 Lower Body Training
STRENGTH TRAINING AND ITS RELATION
TO OTHER BIOMOTOR ABILITIES
Before we delve into the various methods of strength development, it is
important to understand what strength is. Although one can read about
strength in just about any exercise physiology book, let’s review a few
key definitions first and see how and why strength is relevant to your
training program. It’s important to note that strength provides the basis
for success across multiple modalities, as well as increased resiliency
and longevity; and it connects to every biomotor ability (see figure 3.1).
There is no question that strength is the ultimate biomotor ability and
carries over to improvements in other important fitness characteristics
such as speed, power, and muscle endurance. So even if the goal isn’t
necessarily to improve upon maximal strength (increasing your one-rep
max squat), there are still connections between maximal strength and
other abilities such as strength endurance. For example, if your one-rep
max squat increases, it’s likely that your five-rep max will too.
By definition, strength is the ability of a given muscle or muscle group
to generate force (Haff and Bompa 2009). While there are a number of
scenarios for strength to be manifested, the training methods presented
later in this chapter will help provide context around how strength is
developed, its classifications, and specific guidelines on how to develop
each type of strength. The exercises and training programs provided later
in this book will also include appropriate rep schemes that coincide with
these methods. Different strength methods all contribute to increasing
Strength
Agility
Endurance
Muscular Power
endurance
Maximal
strength
Aerobic
endurance
Maximal
Speed
Anaerobic speed
endurance
Speed
endurance
Figure 3.1 Interaction of biomotor abilities and various aspects of sports
performance.
E8335/Brown/F03.01/678308/mh-R2
Reprinted by permission from T. Bompa and C.A. Buzzichelli, Periodization: Theory and
Methodology of Training, 6th ed. (Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics, 2019), 231.
--- PAGE 39 ---
Go Beyond the Basics 23
strength qualities, but establishing a baseline level of maximal strength
(assuming you have built efficient movement patterns with a given
lift) will ensure that all qualities are increasing commensurately. Each
strength method has a specific intent and specific parameters that are
important when using a concurrent (training multiple biomotor abilities
within the same week of training) form of training.
Also, understanding the adaptations that take place from various
forms of strength training helps ensure that your training program will
promote balanced strength development. Maximal force or velocity of a
muscle or a muscle group can be expressed in other biomotor abilities
like speed and endurance. We hear many individuals say things like “I’m
not concerned with gaining maximal strength” simply because they are
not yet educated in the connection between maximal strength and nearly
every other biomotor ability.
Now that we’ve established that maximal strength plays a key role in
the strength development of other biomotor abilities, it is important for
you to understand its other advantages, which may not be obvious to
the untrained eye:
• Synergy of strength modalities. It’s important to know the
differences between strength training methods and how they blend
together in a successful training plan. With this in mind, this book
will use a variety of strength training measures that look to improve
different components of strength at different locations on the force-
velocity curve (maximal force versus maximal velocity). This allows
you to effectively create balance within a training plan and prevent
overtraining.
• Improvement of strength limitations. As Louie Simmons says,
“You’re only as strong as your weakest link.” This holds true with
developing lower body strength. A consistent attack on limitations
with a wide variety of special exercises will prevent weak links from
destabilizing your training and is instrumental to your lower body
training success (Simmons 2015). You cannot effectively build a
base of strength if you’re neglecting general strength measures (i.e.,
unilateral work, which not only allows you to consistently address
your limitations but sets up success with other modalities such as
maximal strength work).
• Avoiding accommodation or adapting to a repetitive stimulus.
The biological law of accommodation states that constant exposure
to the same stimulus results in detraining. In order to prevent
accommodation, exercise selection and volume prescriptions
should be adjusted regularly (Simmons 2015). We know the body
thrives on variability in order to continue to make progress, and
--- PAGE 40 ---
24 Lower Body Training
this variability will come by way of varying exercise selection while
still programming the essential foundational patterns of squatting,
lunging, and hip hinging.
• Improving motor-unit recruitment as it relates to strength
training. Maximal strength work has the ability to recruit and use
higher-threshold motor units.
In short, having a firm grasp on the methods and their overall goals will
be instrumental in creating better synergy, adaptations, and improvement
of limitations. It is clear that heavy lower body resistance training has
massive returns on investment with regard to improving maximal
strength, which has strong ties to performance, but understanding the
endocrinology of multijoint training is a key factor in creating an anabolic
environment in the human body. You need to make the connection that
growth can only occur in an optimal stress environment. Detraining
can also occur if you undergo doses of heavy resistance training that
are too high. For example, stress levels that are too high (by way of a
training session being too long in duration or simply using high-intensity
measures too frequently in one’s program design) can increase catabolic
hormones such as cortisol that may override anabolic hormones, thus
delaying positive training adaptations or eventually leading to central
fatigue. In short, how you manage stress within the training session
affects the success of your training; there is a fine line between too much
volume, intensity, or frequency and not enough stress to induce positive
training adaptations.
STRENGTH TRAINING METHODS
Now that we’ve examined the various qualities of strength training, we’ll
dive into the training methods, in order of importance. These methods
will be used in the programs provided in part III of the book. However,
with any training method comes a number of caveats. For instance, the
ME method is an incredibly effective method to build absolute strength,
but it may simply be out of alignment if you’re not advanced in terms of
training age, training history, and motor control with bilateral movements
such as the squat and deadlift. The old adage “one must learn to crawl
before one can walk” rings true with strength training, and the foundation
of strength training is built with “general strength” measures such as
unilateral exercises. The methods are therefore presented in the order
of which will have the largest effect on your current training state
fastest. Later in this book, we’ll highlight exercise variations and how
those variations are sequenced with a training plan specifically geared
at developing lower limb strength. Keep in mind that while this book is
--- PAGE 41 ---
Go Beyond the Basics 25
designed to improve your knowledge and understanding of optimal lower
body programming, the same logic, tenets, and methods can be applied
when programming for the upper body.
General Physical Preparedness Work
The term general physical preparedness (GPP) gets thrown around
quite a bit—many coaches claim that the goal of their program is to
develop GPP, yet many of these same coaches don’t use measures that
actually develop it. Throwing heavy deadlifts into a workout if you are
already lacking in the strength department won’t develop GPP and
will likely get you hurt. We are talking about building your foundation.
This is something that should take precedence in any programming—if
you cannot pull a sled or carry two heavy kettlebells without having to
rest excessively between sets, then higher-skill work like ME squats or
deadlifts isn’t a smart move. The Russians had a GPP plan for all of their
athletes called the “rule of three” that they employed for three years in
the early stages of training before specialization took place. Yup, you
read that right. Why is this relevant to your training programs? If the
Russians were smart enough to build their athletes’ foundations first,
then maybe this is something you should consider. More importantly, all
of the training goals expressed by most people (look better, feel better,
get stronger, have fun) can be addressed with GPP measures.
Improving maximal strength indirectly connects to qualities of
strength endurance, although the two strengths could not be further
from each other. Using measures like sled drags, we can effectively
improve aerobic capacity and oxidative qualities of the musculature of
the hips, hamstrings, and calves, as well as bridge the gap between ME
and DE training sessions. Think of the sled as an intermediary to improve
strength qualities with only a small cost on the nervous and muscular
systems due to the fact there is zero axial loading. Moreover, the sled
also will improve the oxidative quality of fast-twitch muscle fibers.
Fast-twitch type II muscle fibers have an aerobic as well as
anaerobic ability, which strengthens the connection between maximal
and submaximal strength development and strength endurance.
Unfortunately, sled work is less common and accessible at a commercial
gym, but times have changed and many folks are now investing in
their own home gyms. The sled is an expensive training tool that is the
difference maker between reasonable gains and exceptional gains—it
really is that powerful. The sled may be one of the most valuable training
tools we have available, and at less than 120 dollars it is cost-effective.
The sled is a mainstay in effective program design and can be used for
strengthening as well as restoration. In addition, we can effectively train
--- PAGE 42 ---
26 Lower Body Training
all three energy systems with the sled, and while this book is geared more
toward strength development than it is conditioning, it would be foolish
to not mention the benefits that the sled provides for both strength and
conditioning that are different from those of any other training modality.
One can perform both short and long intervals of work with this tool,
making it quite versatile. In the programs presented in part III of the
book, schemes will be presented for programming sled work optimally
and logically so it is building upon other modalities such as ME work.
Moreover, sled work is a great way to unload the body and expedite
recovery. And building upon our unilateral versus bilateral debate, the
sled in essence is a unilateral training modality where both legs and arms
work contralaterally, allowing you to continuously address asymmetries.
Additionally, because the arms and legs are working in a contralateral
fashion comparable to that of a normal walking gait, the sled can actually
improve the most basic human function of local motion.
GPP is a huge aspect of any successful strength and conditioning
program. Although GPP is often an afterthought and usually traded
for “sexier modalities” like squats or deadlifts, the use of tools like the
sled on a regular basis as well as high-volume band work to improve
connective tissue quality and strengthen tendons can be the catalyst for
longevity and consistency as far as strength and hypertrophy gains are
concerned. And while this work is prescribed more anecdotally, with no
peer-reviewed research to support its efficacy, it makes complete sense
given the physiology of how tendons work. The storage of kinetic energy
takes place in the series elastic component (SEC), the musculotendinous
unit within our tendons, which will also be addressed in parts II and III
where plyometrics are employed to improve explosive strength qualities.
The rapid nature of accommodating resistance (AR) band exercises
and the band’s ability to be executed with rapid movement can increase
the storage of kinetic energy within tendons (Potach and Chu 2016).
Therefore, the makeup of high-volume, rapid band exercises supports
the notion that tendon quality and stiffness can be improved in this
manner. In fact, Westside Barbell, the “strongest gym in the world” that
we discussed previously, relies heavily on higher-volume band exercises
such as leg curls and pushdowns to prevent soft-tissue injuries when
pushing loads with maximal weights. The good news is that this band
work can be done just about anywhere with a few inexpensive bands
on hand, making this option great for the home gym. Additionally, for
the amount of time that’s needed for this work on a daily basis (5 to 10
minutes), the return on investment is sizable.
To recap, building a base of fitness is done most effectively with
measures that would be considered “general” in nature, like single-joint
exercises performed in typical hypertrophy and strength endurance
--- PAGE 43 ---
Go Beyond the Basics 27
schemes or sled drag variations that provide a high volume of work with
little cost on the nervous and muscular systems. However, let’s not forget
that while incurring tissue breakdown and rebuilding is part of gaining
new muscle mass, there must be a way to bridge the gap and expedite
recovery—you’re only as good as your ability to recover between sessions.
This is best accomplished with tools such as a sled and bands, which
both provide unique benefits that go beyond strength qualities. So if
your training plan is going to be complete, modalities like sled drags and
high-volume band exercises are a must. These variations are included in
the training programs provided in part III.
Repeated Effort Method
The repeated effort method is a premier method of improving muscular
imbalance and muscular hypertrophy and providing rehabilitative or
prehabilitative work to ensure you’re constantly improving symmetry.
This work is done through single-joint exercises and isolation work to
target musculature limitations. It’s important to prioritize unilateral
assistance exercises because you can dedicate time to improving
limitations, and classic lifts such as the squat, press, and deadlift will
improve through establishing symmetry and strength in lagging muscle
groups. Because unilateral exercises are less demanding on the nervous
system, you are able to add volume and frequency with the overall
objective of improving deficiencies. The volume of assistance exercises
can be pushed to high levels and align with your training age and needs
quite well with less risk. Moreover, people often fail to take inventory of
where they struggle the most and experiment with exercises that will
potentially help improve their limiting factors. This is what assistance
exercises are for—to strategically improve limitations in a muscle or
muscle group that may be holding one back, or worse, increasing their risk
of injury in the future. A simple example of this is the glutes, which extend
the hips and abduct and externally rotate the legs. They are therefore
responsible for the finishing, hip extension–based portions of the squat
and deadlift. Performing exercises that duplicate these actions is key.
The Romanian deadlift (RDL) and the glute hip thrust are two excellent
choices to build glute strength around hip extension movements.
Of course, improving performance is important to many individuals,
but many people tend to have the primary goal of improving body
composition. Luckily, assistance exercise work can be instrumental in
helping add lean muscle mass because the 8- to 12-rep range will facilitate
muscular hypertrophy (also known as sarcoplasmic hypertrophy), which
is an increase in the volume of sarcoplasmic fluid in the muscle cell
with no actual increase in muscular strength—envision the “muscle
--- PAGE 44 ---
28 Lower Body Training
pump” you get after doing three sets of biceps curls (French 2016). In
this case, time under tension will be significantly higher than for your
max effort, and DE work as the objective is quite different in terms of
strength development. (Hypertrophy work prioritizes time under tension,
whereas DE work prioritizes bar velocity to improve RFD.) The ultimate
goal here is to improve and isolate lagging muscle groups, so single-joint
exercises like split squats, single-leg RDLs, and glute hip thrust variations
are pillars of effective lower body program design.
Benefits of Prioritizing
Assistance Exercises
The benefits of prioritizing assistance exercises (roughly 80 per-
cent of your training volume in a given session) are understated.
Of course, it’s much sexier to squat with a barbell than it is to split
squat with two dumbbells, but the latter allows you to execute higher
volumes of work with less chance of compensation and will carry
over to improve your squat numbers through improved motor-neuron
synchronization. The benefits of prioritization are the following:
Focuses Lagging Muscle Groups
In an effort to target where you may be lacking, we can add a high
volume of work without the risk of exacerbating compensation
patterns—this will carry over to bigger movements like squats
and deadlifts by improving muscle function and coordination with
other muscles.
Safely Creates Higher Volume Through Unilateral
Movements
It is much safer to push the volume of a unilateral movement like a
split squat than a bilateral movement like a back squat. Pushing the
volume on compound movements carries inherent risks of overuse
injury and creating compensation patterns—with heavy, high-rep
bilateral work, there will almost always be a breakdown in the chain
as fatigue sets in. This can exacerbate your current asymmetries
and set you up for injury instead of making actual improvements.
Increases the Time Under Tension
Unilateral work requires less skill and neural demand, so we can
increase loading and volume commensurately, thereby increasing
--- PAGE 45 ---
Go Beyond the Basics 29
time under tension. This leads to increasing muscular hypertro-
phy. Sarcoplasmic hypertrophy is a product of time under tension,
unlike maximal strength development, where time under tension
is much lower.
Improves Bilateral Movement Motor Control and
Performance
To improve bilateral movements like squats, pulls, and Olympic lifts,
you have to have a continuous focus on isolating the areas where you
are weakest. For many, something as simple as adding more direct
posterior chain work is all it takes to produce noticeable gains in
all of the previously mentioned lifts (glute hip thrusts, back raises,
and RDL variations) and is a great vehicle to improve lifts where
the posterior chain predominates, such as squats, deadlifts, and
even the Olympic lifts.
Reduces the Risk of Injury
Assistance exercise work can effectively reduce the risk of injury
as well as rehabilitate current injuries. Advanced individuals must
be constantly assessing where they may be most limited; other-
wise they risk eventually incurring a setback or even detraining
effects. Strategically isolating weak muscle groups with unilateral
exercises can bring someone back from injury as well as prevent
future injuries.
Maximal Effort Method
The ME method is considered the superior method of improving both
intramuscular and intermuscular coordination; the muscles and CNS
adapt only to the load placed upon them, and this method brings forth
the greatest strength gains (Zatsiorsky, Kraemer, and Fry 2021). With
that said, what is meant by “maximal” can span a number of scenarios,
making the ME method a polarizing topic to say the least. Is training
maximally done with multiple repetitions such as a two-, three-, or even
five-rep max? Or are we talking about simply loading the bar with as much
weight as one can move for one repetition? In this book, we are referring
to maximal tension with the heaviest load for one repetition. The ME
method here is lifting a maximal load for one repetition performed with
bilateral movements such as squat, deadlift, and press variations. These
variations are included in the training programs provided in part III.
--- PAGE 46 ---
30 Lower Body Training
The adaptations occur in both intermuscular and intramuscular
coordination—in essence improving both the ability of muscles to fire
in synchronicity with one another and motor patterns. The ME method
brings forth the greatest gains in maximal strength with the most amount
of motor units activated (Zatsiorsky, Kraemer, and Fry 2021) and has the
highest-intensity strength measure (maximum load/resistance for one
repetition) but lowest-volume bilateral training measure (intensity and
volume should not intersect with this method) (Simmons 2015).
As previously mentioned, there are connections between maximal
strength and other biomotor abilities like strength endurance, but we
must first consider if the ME method can fit into your training plan,
allowing you to arrive at optimal results and a favorable risk-versus-
reward ratio. Exercise variations should be rotated weekly to reduce
risk of injury and to identify variations that are anthropometrically most
suited to the individual. Also, individuals using this method should be
fully comfortable building to one-rep maximum with any foundational
movement pattern such as a box squat or a floor press. Another safety
note is that this method requires the use of a spotter every time.
While this method does come with a stigma of being dangerous and is
not recommended for beginner or even intermediate individuals, it’s only
dangerous if the individual has not learned how to properly perform the
big lifts. Not having learned proper motor patterns can be a detriment
with any method, but it’s certainly not prudent to imagine working with
maximal loads without the proper movement patterns enforced first.
However, there are certainly other methods that will be a better match
for novices.
Submaximal Effort Method
The submaximal effort method differs from the ME method in the
number of repetitions executed, not necessarily the level of effort. While
the ME method results in the highest levels of motor-unit recruitment,
the submaximal effort method still results in high levels of motor-unit
recruitment that correspond with the size principle—recruitment order is
determined by the load placed upon the body; as the relative load increases
across multiple repetitions, large motor units will be recruited (Zatsiorsky,
Kraemer, and Fry 2021). With that said, the adaptations with this method
will be different from those with the ME method; however, a key takeaway
is that this method is optimal for individuals who have less experience.
This is because the emphasis is on building motor patterns with more
exposure to lighter loads. Individuals will not typically be asked to go
to one-rep maximum if they are still learning how to move with a given
pattern. Performing a multiple-rep max with a bilateral movement such
--- PAGE 47 ---
Go Beyond the Basics 31
as a squat variation technically constitutes submaximal work—remember
that true ME work is trained with a maximum singular effort.
The adaptations for this method are intermuscular and intramuscular
coordination—in essence improving both the ability of muscles to fire
in synchronicity with one another and motor patterns. Also, time under
tension is higher and results in more hypertrophic adaptations. The
submaximal effort method presents moderate-intensity, moderate-volume
measure—it’s recommended that you do not attempt to ramp up to the
same degree one would expect with a method like the repeated effort
method. Exercise variations should be rotated every two to three weeks
to allow time to ingrain good motor patterns.
In short, the logic behind the submaximal effort method is twofold:
(1) improve motor patterns with bigger bilateral movements—this is
critical for newer individuals before attempting to progress to a method
such as the ME method; and (2) incur higher bouts of volume with bigger
lifts. Remember, you will still incur the largest volume with the repeated
effort method and smaller unilateral exercises, but that’s not to say that
including heavier multiple-rep maxes with bilateral movements does not
have a place in your training plan. You must be mindful of proper volume
prescriptions and how this method synergizes with other methods, which
will play out optimally in the programs in part III.
Dynamic Effort Method
The DE method is used not to increase maximal strength but only to
improve the RFD and explosive strength (Zatsiorsky, Kraemer, and Fry
2021). Working harder is often associated with making more gains in the
gym, but I’d urge you to consider working smarter. The different methods
introduced here will allow you to create a more well-rounded training
plan that covers all bases in terms of special strength development. The
DE method works with lighter loads and emphasizes bar velocity; only
working with submaximal or maximal loads does not offer the benefits
of dedicating time to work on bar velocity or power such as with the DE
method. Oftentimes people associate power training with the Olympic lifts,
and while there is certainly a power component to the Olympic lifts, for
many the Olympic lifts are not practical as they require years of experience
and coaching from a qualified coach. Instead, you can arrive at the same
improvements in RFD, in this case speed strength, by using the DE method
without having to learn the snatch or clean and jerk. Again, the focus is
on bar velocity against intermediate resistance, which will provide better
results than simply using ME or submaximal effort training alone.
The DE method is integral for improving RFD and explosive strength.
(We’ll learn more about explosive strength work via plyometrics in
--- PAGE 48 ---
32 Lower Body Training
parts II and III.) In fact, there are a number of peer-reviewed studies
that support the efficacy of speed training (DE training) in terms of
motor-unit recruitment, improving fast-twitch type II muscle fibers,
and improving the elastic abilities of muscles and tendons (Cormie,
McGuigan, and Newton 2011). Because of this, it is prudent to include
such training in a well-rounded training plan. Even if your goal is to
gain lean muscle mass, this method will provide a synergistic effect
when used with other methods such as the ME method. The volume in
the DE method is significantly higher than that of the ME method, so
together the two methods correspond with each other to optimize gains
in both speed strength and strength speed and to prevent overtraining.
On your DE training days, the inclusion of explosive strength work via
plyometrics allows you to add a vital component of improving RFD as
well as maintaining type II fibers, which is particularly beneficial to
aging individuals. In short, when methods like the ME and DE methods
are used in conjunction with each other in the same week of training,
it creates a symbiotic relationship between methods that, in essence,
oppose but blend well with one another. The DE and ME methods are
different but present similar demands on the CNS.
Furthermore, this method gives an advantage when trying to mimic the
specificity of a sport. For instance, American football plays last between
four and seven seconds, with 45 to 60 seconds of rest between plays.
You can easily replicate this pattern by using the box squat, performing
eight triples every 45 to 60 seconds. This trains the ability of the aerobic
system to replenish high-energy phosphates, which is critical for success
in a sport like American football; while this sport draws largely on the
anaerobic adenosine triphosphate–phosphocreatine (ATP-PC) system,
there is a component of replenishing ATP aerobically since the athlete
does not receive full recovery between efforts. Moreover, this work carries
over to other sports such as ice or field hockey or soccer where explosive
bursts of movement are needed. In this case, the demands can be aligned
with the time domains of each sport allowing an athlete to effectively
train specificity that will have a real-world carryover to their sport.
The adaptations for this method are intermuscular and intramuscular
coordination, in essence improving both the ability of muscles to fire
in synchronicity with one another and motor patterns. The DE method
presents a high-intensity, moderate-volume measure—the focus is on bar
velocity and perfect technique, not maximal loading. Exercise variations
should be rotated every three weeks to allow for time to ingrain good
motor patterns and increase loading each subsequent week. Furthermore,
the DE method will help maintain type II fibers that deteriorate with
age (Potach and Chu 2016). Lastly, to fully reap the benefits of the DE
method, using AR is recommended. Even if you are not an athlete or do
not care about becoming more explosive, the DE method has a place
--- PAGE 49 ---
Go Beyond the Basics 33
within your program. Again, the adaptations are different from those of
the other methods, which creates favorable circumstances.
Explosive Strength
While jumping is an integral part of improving explosive strength for
athletics, it has value in terms of physiology and type II muscle fibers
Optimal Volume Prescriptions
for Training Methods
This chapter would not be complete without discussing optimal
volume recommendations for all methods. The following table shows
optimal Olympic weightlifting rep ranges used for training. Known
as Prilepin’s Chart, it was created by A.S. Prilepin, a Soviet-era
sports scientist who reviewed the training journals of thousands
of weightlifting athletes. It is meant to portray the optimal number
of reps per set and total rep count (volume) for power training
required for the Olympic lifts (the snatch and the clean and jerk).
Approximate Optimal
Percent of number of number of
1RM repetitions reps Total range
40% 4-8 36 30-50
50% 3-6 30 18-30
60% 3-6 24 18-30
70% 3-6 18 12-24
80% 2-4 15 10-20
90+% 1-2 4-10 1-10
Adapted from Prilepin’s Chart, A.S. Prilepin.
This chart has stood the test of time, and I’ve used it extensively
over the last decade. Of course, a guide is just that, a guide, and
never one-size-fits-all, but this chart is a great starting point when
attempting to arrive at optimal volume with the ME, submaximal
effort, and DE methods.
--- PAGE 50 ---
34 Lower Body Training
even for people who simply want to look and feel better and hit new With these variations it would be easy to increase or decrease difficulty
personal records from time to time. For those who don’t have any interest based on individual needs by simply modifying the jump height or adding
in athletic competition or powerlifting, the question comes down to resistance, but if you are not comfortable jumping and landing, there are
determining proper volume prescriptions and plyometric variations. In other available options such as static isometrics that have carryover and
terms of programming for general fitness, performing 20 to 25 jumps training effects similar to those of dynamic plyometrics.
twice a week is more than sufficient to prime the sympathetic nervous
system prior to a training session or as a stand-alone movement for In short, you will find that it is advantageous to have many tools in your
explosive strength work. The benefits span beyond improving power toolbox as far as strength training is concerned, and simply working “hard”
and RFD because we know that type II fibers deteriorate as folks age— doesn’t mean results are guaranteed. Instead, it’s best to work smarter
plyometrics can be a powerful catalyst for maintaining those type II and understand the stress cycle the body goes through with the ebbs and
fibers, and the return on a small investment of time is significant (Potach flows of high-intensity training—this is a major reason why we’ve talked
and Chu 2016). about other measures (repeated effort method and GPP work) that act as
For athletes, on the other hand, plyometrics can certainly serve as a a bridge between your more demanding training sessions.
permanent fixture in multiple sessions each week in which programmed
volume is higher and the skill requisite of variations can be higher. (This ADDITIONAL TRAINING TOOLS
is not always the case because the basic variations are still vital.) Of
Training for strength is comparable to building a house where each
course, this would need to be specific to the individual based on their
tool has a very specific focus and role. Tools such as cluster sets,
training age, the bioenergetics of their chosen sport, and their training
accommodating resistance, reverse bands, sleds, barbells, kettlebells,
history (to include proper ability for jumping and landing mechanics).
dumbbells, or specialized machines all help an individual arrive at their
When used correctly, plyometric training has been shown to improve
desired result. Much like building a house, more tools in your toolbox
the production of muscle force and power, so not only will regular
will allow you to complete the task faster and more efficiently.
plyometric work help with the overall goal of body composition, but it
will also improve performance. Moreover, since we know the sympathetic
Cluster Sets
nervous system’s fight-or-flight response and post-activation potentiation
last roughly five to eight minutes, we can effectively use some form of
Using intraset rest or “clusters” is hardly a new concept. In fact, Olympic
plyometrics to serve as a proper warm-up tool and prime the CNS for a
lifters use clusters regularly, some without even knowing it. Cluster
maximal lift that requires high levels of motor-unit recruitment.
training allows for small bouts of rest (10 to 20 seconds) in between
Choosing variations doesn’t have to be overly complicated. A few
reps to provide recovery and avoid the movement deterioration that
variations that are low in skill requisite and impact are shown in table 3.1.
would normally occur during a straight set with appreciable loading. In
Supertraining, cluster training is categorized two ways: (1) extensive
clustering, which involves four to six repetitions at four- to six-rep max
Table 3.1 Lower-Skill and Low-Impact Plyometric Variations
with 10-second rest intervals between each cluster; and (2) intensive
Plyometric variation Sets Reps Rest clustering with four to six total reps performed one repetition at a time
at between 75 and 90 percent of one-rep max, with about 20 seconds of
Seated dynamic vertical 6 3 45-60 sec rest between repetitions (Verkhoshansky and Siff 2009). There is a place
jump
for both extensive and intensive clustering, and I’ve used both with great
success. For purposes of hypertrophy, where the intent is longer time
Seated dynamic box jump 6 3 45-60 sec
under tension, extensive clustering fits the bill and can be used with a
Dumbbell squat jump + box 6 2 60 sec myriad of movements that would normally cause high neural fatigue.
jump
Cluster sets work quite well when used for general strength purposes.
In part III of this book, I’ve applied cluster work in hypertrophy, strength,
Trap bar jump 5 4 60 sec
and athletic performance settings. Intermediate and even more advanced
--- PAGE 51 ---
Go Beyond the Basics 35
With these variations it would be easy to increase or decrease difficulty
based on individual needs by simply modifying the jump height or adding
resistance, but if you are not comfortable jumping and landing, there are
other available options such as static isometrics that have carryover and
training effects similar to those of dynamic plyometrics.
In short, you will find that it is advantageous to have many tools in your
toolbox as far as strength training is concerned, and simply working “hard”
doesn’t mean results are guaranteed. Instead, it’s best to work smarter
and understand the stress cycle the body goes through with the ebbs and
flows of high-intensity training—this is a major reason why we’ve talked
about other measures (repeated effort method and GPP work) that act as
a bridge between your more demanding training sessions.
ADDITIONAL TRAINING TOOLS
Training for strength is comparable to building a house where each
tool has a very specific focus and role. Tools such as cluster sets,
accommodating resistance, reverse bands, sleds, barbells, kettlebells,
dumbbells, or specialized machines all help an individual arrive at their
desired result. Much like building a house, more tools in your toolbox
will allow you to complete the task faster and more efficiently.
Cluster Sets
Using intraset rest or “clusters” is hardly a new concept. In fact, Olympic
lifters use clusters regularly, some without even knowing it. Cluster
training allows for small bouts of rest (10 to 20 seconds) in between
reps to provide recovery and avoid the movement deterioration that
would normally occur during a straight set with appreciable loading. In
Supertraining, cluster training is categorized two ways: (1) extensive
clustering, which involves four to six repetitions at four- to six-rep max
Table 3.1 Lower-Skill and Low-Impact Plyometric Variations
with 10-second rest intervals between each cluster; and (2) intensive
Plyometric variation Sets Reps Rest clustering with four to six total reps performed one repetition at a time
at between 75 and 90 percent of one-rep max, with about 20 seconds of
Seated dynamic vertical 6 3 45-60 sec rest between repetitions (Verkhoshansky and Siff 2009). There is a place
jump
for both extensive and intensive clustering, and I’ve used both with great
success. For purposes of hypertrophy, where the intent is longer time
Seated dynamic box jump 6 3 45-60 sec
under tension, extensive clustering fits the bill and can be used with a
Dumbbell squat jump + box 6 2 60 sec myriad of movements that would normally cause high neural fatigue.
jump
Cluster sets work quite well when used for general strength purposes.
In part III of this book, I’ve applied cluster work in hypertrophy, strength,
Trap bar jump 5 4 60 sec
and athletic performance settings. Intermediate and even more advanced
--- PAGE 52 ---
36 Lower Body Training
athletes can benefit from using intraset rest, and I’d even go so far as to
say that for beginner athletes, having small bouts of rest between reps
can help instill efficient movement patterns while minimizing the risk
of mechanical breakdown or creating faulty motor patterns. Although it
may seem that cluster sets are not necessary for general fitness, much
like any other method we use, they are a tool that can spark some new
progress. Cluster sets are a staple in my own personal programming and
in my programming for my clients. Here are some reasons why it may be
prudent to use clusters:
• Increased time under tension
• Improved movement patterns
• Increased neural drive with heavier loading
• Efficient use of time
Using cluster sets for the squat or other bilateral movements can be
quite effective in improving your ability to perform higher amounts of
volume with heavier loads. In the case of the squat, we prefer to opt for
longer rest bouts of 15 to 25 seconds, depending on the objectives of your
training session. Here are a few examples:
Front squat: 4 sets × 2.2.2 (15 sec) @ 80%. Rest 3 min.
1 set = perform 2 reps—rerack weight and rest 15 sec, followed by
2 reps + rest 15 sec + 2 reps + rest 3 min
Back squat: 4 sets × 3.2.1 (20 sec) @ 85%. Rest 3 min.
1 set = perform 3 reps—rerack weight and rest 20 sec, followed by
2 reps + rest 20 sec + 1 rep + rest 3 min
In short, cluster work is not only time-efficient but, more importantly,
economical for increasing trainability of a given bilateral movement (squat,
press, pulls) while simultaneously decreasing the risk of breakdown and
thus the chance of overuse injury.
Accommodating Resistance
We alluded to the fact that using AR is optimal with the DE method, so
let’s explore what AR is and why it can be beneficial to your training
plan. AR refers to the use of chains or bands to develop maximal tension
throughout the full ROM, rather than at your weakest point. While there
are a number of benefits to using AR, one of the most noteworthy is
accommodating the strength curve, in which tension is highest where
we are strongest and lowest where we are weakest (Simmons 2015). Here
are a few key points when using AR:
--- PAGE 53 ---
Go Beyond the Basics 37
Bands Versus Chains
The major difference between bands and chains is the phenomenon
known as “overspeed eccentric.” Put simply, in the case of a squat,
bands actually pull you down in the lowering portion of your lift,
increasing the amount of kinetic energy that is produced. Because
of this, you are able to enhance reversal strength and your ability
to absorb force, crucial to any sport. With chains, the overspeed
eccentric is not present because the resistance does not stay consis-
tent when an athlete is lowering the weight. Overall, using bands is
particularly advantageous to strength athletes who want to become
more explosive. These benefits can translate into cracking personal
records in the big three.
• AR allows for greater accountability with bar speed compared to
just straight weight—as tension increases through ROM, you are
forced to accelerate through each repetition and not get complacent.
• AR coincides with the strength curve, meaning that your band
tension will be highest where you are strongest (top of the movement)
and lowest where you are weakest (bottom of the movement).
• The RFD provides more resistance without compromising bar speed
with regard to the strength curve of a given movement (i.e., band
tension is highest where you are strongest and vice versa).
• As weight increases, bar speed decreases. Maximal strength force is
high, and velocity is low. AR gives you the ability to develop speed
strength, whereas with simply adding straight weight, bar velocity
will inevitably decline.
• AR teaches you how to absorb more force, which in turn allows you
to become more powerful.
• Without bands or chains, bar deceleration is inevitable, and when
bar speed is too slow, RFD simply cannot be developed. AR forces
you to accelerate through full ROM, and becoming more explosive
translates to becoming stronger!
• AR can also be used for ME work. The advantage here is that you
will be able to use less straight weight, with overload occurring at
the top of a given movement. As a result, external loading through
ROM is lower, which equates to less breakdown and less delayed
onset muscle soreness. For a movement like an ME rack deadlift,
--- PAGE 54 ---
38 Lower Body Training
where loading for some can reach supramaximal levels, using AR
will reduce the amount of wear and tear compared to what would
occur with just straight weight.
Reverse Bands
Reverse bands are the opposite of AR; bands are fixed to the top of the
squat rack, and the load is lightest at the top and heaviest at the bottom
as a given movement goes through eccentric ROM. (Think of the lowering
phase of an RDL.) The benefits of using this method are improvements in
neuromuscular efficiency and, more importantly, the ability to fine-tune
and repattern foundational movements. In addition, being able to work
with supramaximal loads at the top of each movement creates different
scenarios from just working with straight weight—the degree to which
you’ll be able to exceed your one-rep max will depend on the thickness
of the band you choose. Because you’re able to work with supramaximal
loads, this method tends to be quite demanding on the nervous system,
particularly when used in true ME scenarios with big movements like
the deadlift. However, in submaximal or repeated effort scenarios, you’ll
likely find you’re able to maintain better position even with loads that
exceed your current one-rep max. For the purposes of this book, though,
we recommend the use of reverse bands not in an ME session but as an
assistance exercise with a pattern like the RDL to reinforce (or rebuild)
an effective hip hinge pattern (more on this in chapter 6). With that
said, the reverse band method can also work quite well with repeated
effort work and allow you to reinforce better movement patterns. Even
if you approach loads where you would normally have some mechanical
breakdown if you were using straight weight, the band will deload a
percentage of the weight in the bottom position, thus allowing you to
reinforce better motor patterns with less breakdown while still receiving
the desired training effects.
Reverse bands are optimal when used for the following:
• ME work: one-repetition maximum (1RM)
• Submaximal effort work: 2-6RM
• Repetition effort work: 6- to 10-rep sets
• Technique work: Straight sets with moderately heavy loads of 80
to 85 percent of 1RM
These are the benefits of reverse bands:
• Improved neuromuscular efficiency. This is the ability of the
nervous system to recruit the correct muscles to produce force.
--- PAGE 55 ---
Go Beyond the Basics 39
• Improved stability. This is the ability of your body to stabilize and
brace while achieving supramaximal loading at the end ROM.
• Improved motor patterns. Reverse bands deload a percentage of
the weight at the bottom of a movement and allow you to in essence
do the opposite of AR. Where with AR tension is highest where we
are strongest (accommodating the strength curve), with reverse
bands tension is highest where you are weakest.
• Opportunity for technique work. Reverse bands allow you to work
with heavier loads with less chance of mechanical breakdown.
• Hypertrophy. If gaining lean mass is your goal, reverse bands work
great with big movements so you can create situations with high
amounts of metabolic stress but less mechanical breakdown.
In conclusion, the best part of using reverse bands is that they can
serve a variety of purposes—maximal strength development, technique
improvement, bodybuilding, and motor pattern refinement. The most
critical aspect of this method is that it allows you to maximize trainability
and decrease the risk of injury.
We’ve discussed multiple methods that build strength and learned
that combining a variety of methods will not only improve your classic
lifts such as the squat, bench press, and deadlift but also elicit gains
in muscular hypertrophy. We’ve discussed the role maximal strength
development has at the center of all strength training in terms of its
connection to all biomotor abilities. Although many people are not
concerned with improving their big lifts, understanding why maximal
strength can have a role in someone’s success makes it easy to build value
in such methods as the ME method. It’s also important to remember
that using a variety of methods can help you avoid overuse injury and
overtraining, and the diversity created with multiple methods in one’s
program design ensures that no stone is left unturned and that the
training is varied enough to prevent accommodation.