--- PAGE 93 ---
O max = MHR × SVmax × A O difference
2 2
in which MHR = maximum heart rate, SV = stroke volume (the amount of
blood pumped per heartbeat), and A O difference is the difference in O
2 2
saturation between arterial and venous blood (arteriovenous oxygen
difference), which is an indicator of O extraction in the muscles.
2
In locker room language, O max is the combined ability of your
2
respiratory, circulatory, and muscular systems to take in, distribute, and use
oxygen, and then ultimately remove CO .
2
Oxygen Changes
In the well-trained endurance athlete, MHR decreases slightly with
progressing fitness. Stroke volume (SV), on the other hand, increases, and
A O difference increases. These variables primarily explain the adaptation
2
of lower resting heart rate with increasing fitness. As a muscle, the heart
moves more blood with each beat as it becomes stronger, resulting in a
lower resting heart rate. The capillary density of the muscles increases,
facilitating more blood and gas transport. The net outcome is an increase in
O max. Long, slow, aerobic, low-intensity work early in a training
2
program promotes this capillary adaptation rather than the kinds of
adaptations that take place during higher-intensity workouts after the
endurance base is developed. This is why we initially want that longer,
slower exposure at the beginning, even though you can also get initial
adaptation using the walking–jogging approach.
Endurance training also increases blood volume by expanding plasma
volume and increasing the number of red blood cells. The change in plasma
volume is caused by an increase in water retention, which causes a
condition called hemodilution (a decrease in red blood cell percentage).
However, the absolute numbers are increased, which facilitates more
oxygen transport.
--- PAGE 94 ---
Endurance training causes many adaptations in the body, including an increase in
stroke volume and blood volume, more efficient respiration, and developments in
muscle structure that allow the athlete to perform longer before fatiguing.
Respiratory adaptations also occur. In particular, an increase in
maximum voluntary ventilation (MVV) occurs. This allows for a greater
volume of air to be moved both in and out of the lungs, facilitating an
increase in both carbon dioxide removal and oxygen uptake. This
adaptation is explained by improvements in respiratory muscle endurance
and economy.
Muscle Changes
Numerous changes also take place within the muscles as a result of
endurance training. There is an increase in both the number and size of
mitochondria, the so-called workhorses of the muscle. This adaptation
promotes the use of fatty acids, allowing a greater production of energy
ATP. This is particularly important for the endurance athlete, because it
slows the depletion of body glycogen stores, which are limited. The net
result is a longer time to fatigue. The preference for fatty acid use over
glycogen by the endurance-trained body also results in slower lactic acid
accumulation.
At this point, we start to see the extent of the integration of various body
systems. An increase in respiratory economy and endurance allows for
greater carbon dioxide removal and oxygen transport to the blood. An
--- PAGE 95 ---
increase in capillary density then facilitates the transport of these gases to
the mitochondria in the muscle. The gas diffusion rate at the mitochondria
affects not only energy production but also the substrate source for this
energy production. As carbohydrate (glycogen) is used more sparingly
because of the greater use of fats, time to fatigue is prolonged and lactate
accumulation is slowed. The net result is a faster or longer performance.
Thus, we need to ensure that these three key systems—cardiovascular,
respiratory, and muscular—are developed in unison, because failure of one
system to adapt will compromise the adaptation of any other.
Several other adaptations take place as you develop endurance:
Less carbohydrate is burned and therefore less lactic acid is produced.
The greater number of blood vessels (those little capillaries) allows for
greater removal of metabolic waste products.
Muscle strength improves.
Joints, bones, tendons, and ligaments get stronger.
Efficiency improves.
These and other subtle changes improve a muscle’s ability to keep going.
Think of it as going long, going slow, and going with someone who talks
too much. That’s endurance.
We can see from this list of myriad adaptations that a varied training
approach is needed to address all the required adaptations. Not only should
training be varied, but it should also be sequential because some adaptations
are required before others. For example, long, slow work should precede
high-intensity work. The following sections explain the progression from
developing endurance at 60 to 75 percent MHR (or your walking–jogging
mix), to enhancing endurance at 75 to 80 percent, to maintaining endurance
at 65 to 70 percent and 60 to 65 percent.
Endurance Development
To develop and improve endurance in the zone of 60 to 75 percent MHR, it
is more productive to spend as much time as close to 75 percent as possible.
Exercising at the 60 percent end of the zone can be painfully slow. In the
general endurance zone of 60 to 75 percent, the muscle uses a mixture of fat
--- PAGE 96 ---
and carbohydrate for fuel. These fuels are supplied at varying ratios
depending on the intensity of the activity. For low-intensity endurance
activities with lots of oxygen present, the majority of the fuel comes from
fat, although carbohydrate still provides limited amounts of fuel. However,
if the event lasts long enough, the limited supply of carbohydrate stored in
the muscle can be depleted. In marathon runners this is known as hitting the
wall and happens when the muscle has only fat remaining for its fuel
supply. To burn fats cleanly, the body needs lots of oxygen, which forces
the runner to slow down. Improving the body’s ability to burn fat more
efficiently so carbohydrate supplies will last until the end of the event is one
of the major goals of endurance training (i.e., becoming a better butter
burner). A second one, which we will elaborate on shortly, is the
strengthening of the musculoskeletal system.
To demonstrate the importance of oxygen in endurance activities,
consider that you draw 95 percent of your fuel from fat and 5 percent from
carbohydrate at basal metabolism (when you are in deep sleep and your
body is awash with oxygen). However, once you exercise hard enough to
elevate your heart rate into the endurance training zone, that ratio quickly
changes. For unfit folks, carbohydrate becomes more important as the
availability of oxygen decreases. In the 70 to 75 percent maximum heart
rate zone, as much as half of the energy comes from carbohydrate. It takes
the liver 24 to 48 hours to convert glycogen, the chemical form of
carbohydrate stored in the muscles, from various forms of carbohydrate. If
you exercise after only 24 hours of recovery (i.e., daily), you will create a
short-term glycogen deficit that will then cause muscle enzymes to improve
their ability to break down and metabolize fats. This can happen to such a
degree that endurance athletes such as long-distance runners and cross-
country skiers get as much as 80 percent of their fuel from fat when in the
low range of 60 to 70 percent MHR. Have you ever wondered why the great
endurance athletes are so thin? One reason is that they burn a lot of fat.
Keep this revelation in mind: Once you have felt what drop-dead, all-out
maximum heart rate exhaustion feels like at 100 percent, you will never feel
any worse. Every 100 percent effort in a race after that will feel the same—
just as painful and agonizingly breathless, but those efforts will not feel any
harder. If your training is successful and makes you faster, the pain, torture,
and agony of an all-out effort just does not last as long. A 100 percent MHR
--- PAGE 97 ---
effort is the limit of human capacity that keeps us from working ourselves
to death. The good-old-college try of 110 percent effort is a sportswriter’s
myth.
The good news is that your other training zones also will feel the same.
Your perception of the effort of your slow pace at 70 percent MHR is still
the same: It’s easy. Look at it this way: If your pace for a new 5K personal
record gets faster at 100 percent MHR, why wouldn’t your training pace at
70 percent also get faster while still feeling just as easy as it did when your
PR was slower? If you are in better shape at harder, faster paces, your
easier, slower paces will also get faster. Right? Therefore, do not make the
false assumption that, in order to improve, you have to work harder at
higher percentages. You can’t recover fully from a previous hard workout or
race if you increase the effort on an easy day from 70 to 80 percent MHR.
Harder workouts such as that are the poster children of the dreaded
overtraining syndrome that inevitably leads to trashed and prematurely aged
legs.
So what do you do if you can’t train harder but want to get better?
Simple—you run more. Go back and add minutes to your training
programs. If you have already learned that you can’t get faster by training
harder more often, then use the variable of duration to add more easy
minutes to your training pattern while keeping the intensity levels at the
same respective percentages. Run longer warm-ups before and cool-downs
after hard workouts. Run a little longer on your recovery days and lengthen
the time of your long run. When you run more low-intensity miles, you will
get stronger as you progressively add the extra resistance of more strides
against gravity. It’s the same principle of progressive resistance training as
doing more reps of light weights in order to get stronger. You can compare
the ground-hugging stride of easy jogging to lifting light weights. There is
not too much gravity to overcome when you don’t bounce high into the air
with each stride. Then sprinting, with its greater gravitational resistance,
can be thought of as similar to lifting heavier weights fewer times in order
to get stronger. Because you have probably already maxed out how often
you can survive high-intensity work, the safer option is simply more LSD—
long, slow distance, not the drug. In short, the stronger you get, the faster
you will run. While reaching this stage of energy efficiency, you also will
be performing enough aerobic exercise in the 60 to 75 percent zone to cause
--- PAGE 98 ---
the adaptations you need in the cardiovascular, respiratory, and muscular
systems.
Equally important as the ability of your muscular engine to use fuel is
the strength of the transmission—your connective tissues. Ligaments,
tendons, bones, cartilage, and joints take much longer than muscles to get
stronger because their blood supply is not nearly as rich. Therefore, you
need to beware of the dreaded Cadillac engine with a Chevy transmission
syndrome. Because your powerful muscular engine can easily tear up your
delicate connective transmission, you’ll be susceptible to classic overuse
injuries such as Achilles tendonitis, plantar fasciitis, iliotibial band
syndrome, and even stress fractures. Avoiding these perils will be covered
in later discussions concerning the length of time you need to spend in
phase I.
Training Techniques for Developing
Endurance
You will develop and improve your endurance by spending more time
exercising in the zone of 60 to 75 percent MHR. You can do so by using
either one or both of two basic types of workouts. The most common is
LSD using steady, continuous exercise in the 60 to 75 percent MHR range.
Research, however, has shown that varying the paces of your workout is
also an effective technique. In the first edition of this book, we labeled that
type of training “heart rate fartlek.” The idea was to enjoy changes of speed
that caused your heart rate to quickly reach the upper 75 percent limit.
Then, by slowing down, your heart rate would recover to the lower limit of
60 percent MHR. In the spirit of this book and with an apology to the
Swedes who developed and popularized fartlek (which they defined as
“speed play”) training, we prefer to use the term “heartlek,” which we
coined while working with Wahoo Fitness a few years ago.
Our experience is that beginners should not use heartlek training because
the change in speeds can increase the likelihood of injury. If you can
perform a continuous 30-minute bout of LSD, even at a lower intensity,
that’s your best start.
--- PAGE 99 ---
To execute a heartlek workout, picture your heart rate fluctuating up and
down like a roller coaster. You can make that happen by jogging up to 75
percent MHR and then walking down to 60 percent MHR. Or, if you are in
better shape, you can run up to 75 percent MHR and then jog your heart
rate back down. You can be as creative as you wish. Use both target heart
rates within this zone to elevate and lower your heart rate and vary your
pace. The goal is simply to be able to increase the amount of work using
either of these low-intensity modes of exercise to improve running duration
from at least 30 minutes up to 60 minutes and beyond if your goal activity
is something like a marathon.
We have included this piece in the aerobic chapter even though we will
develop it more in the anaerobic chapter. By this point you have achieved a
solid endurance base that is strong enough to allow you to run for 30 to 60
minutes and maintain your pace across a range of terrain. For example, you
can push yourself on a hill and see an increase in exercise heart rate, and
you are capable of holding that pace and then dropping your heart rate back
down on the flats. Using the heartlek approach, you should be able to inject
three or four higher-intensity spurts for 30 to 120 seconds over your 30-
minute run without ever falling below your base of 60 percent MHR.
Continuous or varied pace workouts can be used singularly or in
combination with the base phase of conditioning to develop aerobic
endurance. This is what we refer to as getting in shape. Using these
approaches will allow you to stimulate your muscles long enough and over
long enough periods of time to induce adaptations.
If you are just getting in shape or if your level of athletic activity has
been interrupted, you will need to redevelop your endurance base. Phase I
of conditioning usually takes the average, sedentary adult up to 16 weeks. If
you have already been through the conditioning process, you should be able
to redevelop an endurance base within six to eight weeks. A shorter period
of four weeks should be sufficient to redevelop endurance if you are coming
back after a postseason period of active rest. In any case, an adaptation of
classic heartlek training is ideal for training in the 60 to 75 percent MHR
zone.
--- PAGE 100 ---
Heartlek workouts, in which you cycle your heart rate up and down within your
training zone, will help you quickly build a base of endurance and prepare for more
challenging events, such as races.
If you are building a new base, take careful note of the following
discussion. Our heart rate heartlek workouts are the essence of heart rate
monitor training. If you have been fairly active and have had athletic
experiences earlier in life, you might consider LSD the most attractive
activity for getting back into shape. But please read the following to see
how the advantages of monitored training can be applied. Heart rate
heartlek training is perfect for whichever activity—jogging, rowing, cycling
—you choose. Heart rate heartlek workouts are a great way to introduce
small elements of faster movement into your workouts for manageable
periods of time and still keep the risk of injury at a minimum.
Our adaptation of heartlek training to the heart rate monitor is the perfect
example of smart, individualized training. Here’s an example of a 20-
minute session:
1. Calculate your target heart rate zone with the upper limit at 75
percent and a lower limit at 60 percent MHR.
2. Pick an exercise mode—walking, jogging, running, cycling, rowing,
or any of the machines such as the elliptical or stair-climbing types in
the aerobic section of your fitness center.
3. Start exercising slowly and easily as your heart rate eases up into
your 60 to 75 percent zone. As you warm into the workout, you’ll
--- PAGE 101 ---
probably find yourself gradually picking up the pace and effort. Your
heart rate will rise and eventually hit the 75 percent upper limit.
4. At that point, to keep the workout aerobic, quickly slow until your
heart rate drops back to as close to 60 percent as you can get it.
5. Next, gradually play with the speed of your workout until you come
back up to 75 percent effort. By this we mean that you should
experiment with different speeds until you get a nice feel for how fast
you need to move to elicit the heart rate response you need.
Following this routine for the recommended number of weeks will
greatly improve endurance and your overall fitness. Raising your heart rate
will require faster and longer pickups. The result is that you will cover more
distance during the 20-minute workout. You also will enjoy a nice, safe
improvement in your speed without risk of injury because, at the upper limit
of 75 percent MHR, your pickups will still be aerobic and, therefore, free of
lactic acid buildup in the muscles.
After your first couple of workouts, you’ll have a mental measure of the
effort and be able to increase and decrease your heart rate without too much
difficulty. How long you take to work up to 75 percent and then coast down
to 60 percent will be your choice. This option gives you a choice of a
variety of movements. You can increase the effort to 75 percent quickly by
going faster, recover to 60 percent slowly by gradually easing off the pace,
or vice versa.
Heartlek workouts are a creative version of interval training without the
rigorous repetitions of the same distance. It is a training system that can be
used to develop all four fitness components of endurance, stamina,
economy, and speed.
The fartlek system originated in the 1930s and was made famous in the
1940s by Gunder Hagg and Arne Andersson, who took turns lowering the
world record for the mile as they tried to break the barrier of the magic 4-
minute mile. Hagg eventually got his time down to 4:01.4, where the record
stood for nine years until Roger Bannister ran 3:59.4 in 1954.
LSD training, on the other hand, is all about consistency of pace and
effort. Rather than raising and lowering your heart rate like a roller coaster,
you simply maintain the same jog, or slow run, pace over a set time. As you
work your way into shape, you start at the lower end of the intensity range
--- PAGE 102 ---
(60 to 75 percent MHR) to maintain the same pace for the allotted time and
distance. Your heart rate will gradually rise to 75 percent as the workout
continues. As your fitness improves, you’ll find it easier to train at a higher
intensity with the same sense of effort, resulting in either more distance
covered in the same amount of time or the same distance covered in less
time.
A note of caution: Depending on the shape you’re in, the opposite may
happen. You may start out working too hard and reach your upper heart rate
target in less than a New York minute. If so, then you’ll have to spend your
whole workout tapping the brakes to stay in this zone. It’s best to keep in
mind the advice of Walt Stack, a great amateur philosopher, about the
running boom in the early 1970s: “Start slow, and then taper off.”
LSD training is the natural follow-up to low-level heartlek training. As
you increase fitness through heartlek training, you will be able to hold your
pickups close to and at 75 percent for longer and longer periods. Eventually,
you will be able to complete the entire training session holding pace at 75
percent MHR with no need to slow down to keep your heart rate from
creeping over 75 percent. When you get to this point, you are ready to add
LSD training to the mix. The LSD training will be done at a lower intensity
to allow you to go longer, but the concept is the same: Maintain an aerobic
pace for the desired duration, gradually increasing that duration for greater
endurance. Then once you have completed 12 to 16 weeks of solid LSD
training, you can introduce the heartlek approach, which is a more advanced
and higher-intensity version of training.
Another note of caution: To prevent overuse injuries, sports medicine
specialists advise that the volume of work should increase only 10 to 15
percent per week. Of course, you should exercise caution, but if you are
starting at 10 miles (16 km) per week, adding just 1 to 1.5 miles (1.6 to 2.4
km) over the week might be a little too conservative.
Duration of Workouts for Endurance
Development
Ultimately, you will execute the workouts outlined in this chapter for longer
periods of time. However, for an exercise session to provide enough
--- PAGE 103 ---
stimulus to elicit a conditioning effect, it must last a minimum of 20
minutes. The number of times during a heartlek workout that you raise and
lower your heart rate within your 60 to 75 percent effort zone depends on
your level of general fitness. As you get stronger and fitter, it will gradually
take longer to elevate your heart rate to your upper target and take less time
to recover.
This 20-minute period may seem too short, and with the intensity so low,
you may think that it is too easy. You may wonder whether you’ll ever get
in shape at this rate. But hold on. This is a delicate period of adaptation.
Your muscular system will get stronger rather quickly thanks to its good
blood supply and may give you the impression that you’re ready for bigger
and better workouts. At the start of this period of getting into shape, you
will probably experience muscle stiffness and soreness. However, you’ll
find that you quickly get over those little aches and pains, and your engine
will start adding horsepower. To avoid setbacks, we suggest that you follow
a hard–easy pattern of workouts until you finish the recommended number
of weeks appropriate for your circumstance.
Sample Base-Building Training
Pattern
At its most elemental level, here’s how a typical training plan begins and
follows the classic pattern of hard–easy days. We use the word hard rather
loosely here to refer to the days that you do the heartlek workouts. The
remaining days are easy, continuous activity at 60 to 65 percent MHR, or
total rest (because nothing is easier than a real day off).
Please keep in mind as you study these samples that they are designed to
demonstrate the principles involved and are not training programs. The
sample training programs presented in the last chapters of the book contain
the progressions in volume, intensity, and frequency that you would
realistically expect to follow.
For weeks 1 and 2, follow this pattern:
Hard days (Monday and Thursday): 20-minute heartlek at 60 to 75
percent MHR. The 20 minutes do not include slow, easy warm-up
--- PAGE 104 ---
activity or a similar period for cooling down at less than 60 percent
MHR.
Easy days (Tuesday and Saturday): 20-minute recovery effort at a
steady pace of 65 to 70 percent MHR. Follow the same warm-up and
cool-down patterns as you used on the hard days.
Off days (Wednesday, Friday, and Sunday): Take days off. These are
complete rest days with no activity.
If you experience aches or pains or feel you need more time to adjust to
this routine, extend these workouts for another week or two. If you feel
good and are ready and eager to advance to harder work, move on to the
next pattern.
For weeks 3 and 4, follow this pattern:
Hard days (Tuesday and Thursday): 20-minute heartlek at 60 to 75
percent MHR.
Easy days (Monday and Friday): 25- to 30-minute recovery effort at
65 to 70 percent MHR.
Long workout (Saturday): Begin to extend your continuous easy effort
at 65 to 70 percent by making this workout 5 minutes longer than the
time of your Monday and Friday workout each week until you reach 45
minutes.
Off days (Wednesday and Sunday): Take these days off.
Repeat this pattern until you can do the heartlek workouts for 30 minutes
by adding 3 to 5 minutes to them each week. Gauge your readiness to
increase the length of the workouts by how your legs feel. Heartlek
workouts are a rather artistic system of training and allow you the freedom
to determine your own fate. One good rule of thumb to apply is the “three
out of four” rule—every fourth week should be a shorter or lower-intensity
recovery week.
Be very conservative about how fast you add more volume in these
zones to give those connective tissues a chance to strengthen so you don’t
blow your transmission. One sign that you are ready to move on would be
noting that your fitness level has improved to the point that the distance
covered during the workouts has plateaued.
--- PAGE 105 ---
Once you are ready, move to the following plan for the next two to four
weeks, adding the other endurance-building workout—long, slow distance,
or LSD—to the pattern. Use nothing harder than 75 percent MHR on the
LSD.
For the next two to four weeks, follow this pattern:
Hard days (Tuesday and Saturday): 30 minutes of heartlek at 65 to 75
percent MHR.
Hard days (Thursday and Sunday): 45 to 60 minutes of LSD at 60 to
75 percent MHR.
Easy days (Monday and Wednesday): 30 to 45 minutes of recovery
effort at 65 to 70 percent MHR.
Off day (Friday): Take the day off to recover fully.
Start adding 5 minutes per workout to the time of your easy recovery
days from the previous pattern. Work up to 45 minutes on Thursday and 60
minutes on Sunday.
During these weeks, the increased frequency of six sessions per week
will result in your experiencing some days of accumulating fatigue in your
working muscles. We’ve also increased the intensity of the heartlek by
raising the lower limit of the recovery target heart rate from 60 to 65
percent MHR. This will make the workout harder by cutting down the
recovery time. All this is due to our deliberate attempt to create a short-term
chronic glycogen deficit in your muscles to stimulate the cells to use more
fat as fuel. The easy days will allow you to recover, but you will also have
to make a determined effort to slow down and take it easy on the recovery
workouts. To be sure that you recover as much as possible, keep your upper
target heart rate at just 70 percent. You’ll notice that these workouts are
definitely much harder, but still in the zone that has a low risk of injury.
If going so easy on your recovery days seems like punishment, keep this
pearl of wisdom about physiology in mind: The easier and more aerobic the
workout, the more oxygen is present in the circulating blood. It is then
available for the muscle to use so it can burn a higher percentage of its fuel
from fat, thus sparing the carbohydrate you eat for conversion to glycogen.
Transition to Enhance Endurance
--- PAGE 106 ---
A consequence of lower-intensity, easier training to develop endurance is
the less-than-complete strengthening of muscles, ligaments, and tendons.
Another, by the very definition of aerobic work (no huffing and puffing
allowed), is that your respiratory system’s muscles are just beginning to get
into good shape. Now it’s time to move those parts of your body through a
transition zone that will focus on the upper edge of your aerobic capacity.
The extra effort and speed will put a little more stress on these systems and
will prepare you for the strains of high-intensity anaerobic conditioning that
will come when you move up the training triangle into the stamina,
economy, and speed zones.
This transition work will be in the steady-state zone of 75 to 80 percent
MHR. These two percentages are, respectively, right at the top of the
aerobic zone and right at the bottom of the anaerobic zone. Workouts in this
zone can put a modest stress on your respiratory system while you push
your biomechanical system through bigger and faster ranges of motion.
To see what we mean, picture this example of 28-year-old Hannah
making this transition from jogging and easy, low-intensity LSD running to
steady-state running:
On easy days, she’s not just jogging with those little, bitty, mincing
steps anymore or alternating easy strides for short heartlek pickups.
She’s running lightly and comfortably with a smoother, longer, but not
full stride for extended periods of time.
She’s not breathing hard, but may have to talk in Hemingway
sentences, which are much shorter than the Faulkner-style run-on
sentences she used when jogging.
She feels like she could run forever at this pace, which is close to what
she would do if in shape to run for 10 to 13 miles (16 to 21 km).
Picture yourself doing your activity of choice at an effort comparable to
this example, and then apply the following sample workout pattern to your
sport.
Sample Endurance-Enhancing
Training Pattern
--- PAGE 107 ---
Earlier in this chapter we introduced the concept of hard–easy training by
alternating days of light-intensity exercise with complete days off for full
recovery. Granted, the days of easy workouts probably did not require much
time for energy restoration. However, they were important for giving your
legs time to build stronger muscles and tendons. As you climb up the
training triangle to harder levels of effort, the recovery days become even
more important. Effective recovery between steady-state hard days at 75 to
80 percent MHR demands that you keep your effort at 70 percent and lower
on easy days. At this level of seriousness, you will still be working out on
easy days with the emphasis on burning fat for fuel. Review the following
workout pattern and then compare it with your endurance pattern. Picture
yourself following these principles while pursuing the sport of your choice.
The times in the following sample vary widely because of the differences in
sports. See the chapter on your sport of interest for appropriate workouts.
These can be found in part III of the book.
Building Your Baseline, Trimming
Your Waistline
If you’re like us, you might come off the winter holiday season with a few extra pounds
or kilograms and a bunch of missed workouts. However, in your haste to remedy the
weight issue, you should literally slow down and consider the following points. First,
although you might be concerned about body weight, doing the correct type of base
training in the winter will more appropriately address this issue. Second, this time of
year should be about base building, or developing an aerobic foundation. Third, to do
this, you must pick the correct low level of intensity. Not only will this help build your
aerobic base, but it also will help with fat burning and weight control.
For simplicity, let’s assume that the body burns only carbohydrate and fat. At all times
the body burns some combination of these two and never exclusively one or the other.
We could further simplify this explanation by defining fat use as aerobic exercise and
carbohydrate use as anaerobic exercise even though both contribute in all forms of
exercise energy production.
Assume we have two basic fiber types in skeletal muscle: fast twitch and slow twitch.
They have different recruitment patterns that vary as a function of exercise intensity.
Fast-twitch fibers are larger than slow-twitch fibers, and smaller fibers are always
recruited first. We call this the size principle. As the intensity increases and more force
is needed, more fast-twitch fibers are recruited. As force output or speed increases, you
breathe more heavily at the same time that you need to produce more energy. In other
words, you start to use more anaerobic energy or carbohydrate. The pattern goes like
this: Increase the intensity, increase the fast-twitch recruitment; increase the fast-twitch
--- PAGE 108 ---
recruitment, increase anaerobic metabolism; increase anaerobic metabolism, increase
carbohydrate use and decrease fat use. So, to burn fat, you need to exercise slower.
Consider this: If you exercised at 85 to 90 percent MHR for 30 to 40 minutes, you
would burn mostly carbohydrate. Carbohydrate is restored on a nearly daily basis,
which means that this approach causes very little fat-weight loss. This is why many
people exercise hard and yet do not lose weight and may, in fact, gain weight. The
substrate (fat or carbohydrate) that is burned is pretty much a function of the oxygen
available. The overall state of the cardiovascular and respiratory systems plays a large
role in fuel economy. Increased aerobic fitness means increased fat burning. Therefore,
you want to spend appropriate amounts of time developing your cardiorespiratory
system at the right intensity. Here are factors to consider:
It takes 12 to 16 weeks to develop and deposit new blood vessels.
The stimulus for developing and depositing new blood vessels is consistent
aerobic stimulus lasting 40 minutes or more four or five times a week.
The intensity must be such that it predominantly taxes the aerobic system and not
the anaerobic system.
The process takes time and patience.
In other words, aerobic base building and weight control require long periods of low-
level, steady-state exercise, and the off-season is perfect for it.
Finally let’s discuss the concept of exercise duration and a concept called oxygen
deficit. Anytime metabolic intensity changes (you start to exercise or change the
intensity during exercise), you’ll notice a short period of discomfort or heavier breathing.
This is because you have briefly moved from a dependence on aerobic metabolism to a
dependence on anaerobic metabolism. After a few minutes, the respiratory and
cardiovascular systems catch up (reach a steady state), and this brief shortage of
oxygen is corrected. This period of oxygen shortage is called the oxygen deficit, and it
occurs at the beginning of exercise and with changes in intensity.
What does all this mean? When you start to exercise, you experience an oxygen
deficit that increases your dependence on anaerobic metabolism and carbohydrate.
After 10 to 15 minutes, things settle down, and if the intensity is low enough, your
dependence reverts back to fat. Even with this adjustment, it takes about 30 minutes to
start using more fat than carbohydrate. This is why you must exercise steadily for 30 to
40 minutes for weight control. You can kill two birds with one stone by methodically
designing your off-season program to focus on base building and by being patient.
We assume that the long workout is on the weekend because most people
have more time available on Saturday or Sunday. This example uses
Sunday; if your long workout is on Saturday, just move everything back one
day.
Sunday: 45 to 90 minutes in the 65 to 75 percent MHR zone. Because
of the length of this workout, even though the intensity is rather low,
we consider it a hard day because of the amount of fuel burned.
--- PAGE 109 ---
Monday and Wednesday: 20 to 45 minutes of easy recovery effort at 65
to 70 percent MHR.
Tuesday and Saturday: 30 to 45 minutes of steady-state effort at 75 to
80 percent MHR. This includes 5 to 10 minutes at 60 to 70 percent to
warm-up. Cool down with a few minutes of very easy, slow activity.
Thursday: 5 to 10 minutes at 65 to 70 percent to warm up, then 15 to
20 minutes of heart rate heartlek, raising and lowering your heart rate
between 70 and 80 percent.
Friday: Relax. You’ve worked long and hard, so take the day off.
After several weeks of this training pattern, you might want to do a time
trial or jump into competition to see what kind of shape you are in.
However, test or not, you will be ready to take your training up a notch to
phase II and to the anaerobic threshold level of effort.
Maintenance of Aerobic Endurance
We offer a fairly generous target heart rate range of 60 to 75 percent MHR
to develop endurance. We offer the rather narrow but specific range of 75 to
80 percent MHR to enhance endurance. Two other target heart rate zones
within the endurance range have useful purposes. They are known as
recovery zones. Working out in these zones allows you to maintain
endurance while your muscles rebuild and refresh themselves with new
supplies of glycogen, that ever-important source of energy used during
longer and harder workouts.
In addition to using fat for fuel, muscles also burn a carbohydrate fuel
known as glycogen. A good way to distinguish the two fuels is to think of
fat as diesel fuel and glycogen as rocket fuel. Fat (diesel fuel) is a greasy,
slow-burning source of energy that needs a lot of oxygen to be burned
efficiently. Glycogen (rocket fuel) is highly volatile energy that can be
burned in the absence of oxygen, although not efficiently for very long.
Taking the car engine analogy a bit further, imagine that your muscles are
the cylinders of an engine to which your carburetor sends both the gasoline
and the oxygen to be ignited by electricity from the spark plug. The
controlled explosion drives the piston up and down, creating movement just
the way your muscles make your bones move back and forth. However,
--- PAGE 110 ---
there is one important difference between our imaginary engine and your
body: Your muscle cells are much more fuel efficient because they can burn
two types of energy at the same time. Both diesel and rocket fuels are
burned together so that the slow-burning fatty fuels are ignited by the hot-
burning glycogen.
All this happens adequately in the 65 to 70 percent effort range because
the slower paces at this lower level of intensity provide more oxygen, thus
allowing more of the always-available free fatty acids to be burned, sparing
the glycogen.
Of course, an even more effective recovery can be accomplished in the
60 to 65 percent effort zone, but at this level the pace becomes so slow that
it takes the threat of arrest by the pace police to get anyone to take it that
easy. Therefore, the only time we would recommend staying in this zone is
the day before an important competition if you are one of those compulsive,
obsessive athletes who worry about getting out of shape if they miss a day
of training.
If you have become hooked on smart exercise and want to develop a
higher level of fitness, the next chapters offer guidelines to follow in your
quest for stamina, economy, and speed. Now it’s time to follow the old
adage: If you want to race faster, you have to train faster.
Rest, Recover, and Return
Rest and recovery are just as important as the stimulus to the muscle and
cardiovascular systems in the first place. Without adequate recovery,
workouts become more difficult, the injury risk increases, and adaptations
plateau. Residual soreness and fatigue have been replaced by training
methods based on research that prescribes appropriate workloads and
intelligent recovery, which lead to better performance. Recovery now
involves nutrition, sleep, easy days, stretching, supplements, and much
more. But the bottom line is that the muscle tissue needs time to recover
and regenerate. The muscle needs these periods, generally 24 to 48 hours,
of low-intensity activity to repair microtears in the tissue and restore energy
supplies. On a simple level, we can detect the state of recovery by
measuring resting heart rate.
--- PAGE 111 ---
Consider this: A musculoskeletal system in a state of repair leads to more
physiological activity in the body. For example, it means increased blood
flow, more tissue repair, more energy conversion and storage, more cooling,
more waste product removal, and so on. Because the heart is the engine
driving all activity, the engine’s RPMs will be higher than normal. So, if
you monitor the heart’s RPMs 24-7, you can track very small increases and
decreases in your average resting heart rate. An increase of even one or two
beats over 24 hours is enough to inform you that recovery may be
incomplete. Of course, you must first have established a solid baseline of
resting heart rate data in order to have a reliable average resting heart rate.
It is recommended that you measure this first thing in the morning upon
awakening (see chapter 1 and chapter 2 for more details).
Keep in mind that resting heart rate alone might not be able to tell you
that the body is still in a state of heightened activity and that recovery is
incomplete, but other heart rate data are available. Thanks to new
understanding of data about cardiac health, heart rate variability (HRV) is a
new tool that can provide athletes and exercisers more insight into recovery.
In the past, an electrocardiogram (ECG) machine was needed to measure
HRV by tracing the electrical activity of the cardiac muscles to measure the
actual interval between heartbeats. But now the cheaper technology of chest
and wrist heart rate monitors and new apps for smartphones make
measuring and using HRV possible and more practical.
Cardiologists have long used HRV, variation in the interval between
heartbeats, as a measure of cardiac health. HRV scores range from 0 to 100,
with low scores (little variation) indicating poor health, and high scores
(greater variation) reflecting good health. HRV scores tend to peak between
20 and 30 years of age and decline thereafter. Average HRV scores for
healthy individuals tend to be about 60, but again it is age specific.
So, what does this mean? Generally, HRV indicates the body’s health,
fitness, and ability to handle a workload. Low HRV indicates poor fitness
and the body’s inability to adapt to stress, whereas high HRV indicates
fitness and that the body is able to tolerate stress or has recovered from a
previous stressor. During your recovery periods, when you are not working
out and while sleeping, you want to see variations in your resting heart rate
response. Tracking this variation in the intervals between heartbeats
provides useful data to be used in conjunction with your average resting
--- PAGE 112 ---
heart rate. Measuring HRV is becoming widely used in both clinical
populations and among competitive athletes and is helpful in determining
how well the body has recovered from training. Although it requires a little
more daily analysis, it is worth the effort because it allows you to more
effectively adjust your training sessions depending on whether you are
recovered or not.
Table 5.1 shows HRV across the lifespan. The data were adapted from
several sources that include athletic and nonathletic populations.
Calculating HRV is not straightforward, so we recommend investing in a
system that will do the calculations for you (such as the Oura sleep and
activity tracking ring).
TABLE 5.1 HRV Scores by Age and Fitness
Men Age group (years) High fitness HRV score
18–25 68
26–35 64
36–45 60
46–55 56
56–65 53
66–75 52
75+ 53
Women Age group (years) High fitness HRV score
18–25 65
26–35 61
36–45 58
46–55 57
56–65 53
66–75 49
75+ 49
Data from Umetani et al. (1998); Voss et al. (2015); www.elitehrv.com.
--- PAGE 113 ---
In the next few chapters we will look at training approaches to target
different types of fitness, namely aerobic and anaerobic. You now know
from this chapter that the intensity of exercise targets a specific energy
system and, therefore, a specific adaptation. However, in reality, most
exercise sessions involve varying intensities, and the use of energy systems
changes frequently, even when a particular system is the focus. Traditional
approaches to training have focused heavily on the consistent and steady
stimulation of a particular system as the way to achieve best results.
However, a growing band of research now suggests that for general fitness
and even weight loss, varying your exercise intensity within a given session
is extremely valuable and potentially even better, depending on your goals.
Terms for varying intensity include interval training, circuit training, and
heartlek training. These approaches vary the intensity on a continuum from
maximal to easy throughout the workout, forcing you to develop and
balance multiple systems at once and learn to tolerate the varying
physiological challenges presented by heavy use of a particular energy
system.
In general, all these approaches are similar to interval training—mixing
harder efforts with recovery periods—which provides several benefits:
More calories burned per unit of time
Adaptation of both aerobic and anaerobic systems
Greater speed of movement
Less boredom
Of course, interval training is not for everyone. The higher intensity
leads to quicker fatigue, greater discomfort, and even injury. So, it is
generally a good idea to have a sufficient level of basic fitness before
considering it. An interval training session might include 2 to 10 changes in
intensity during a session. A successful interval session requires you to
recover adequately so that you can perform the work pieces at the correct
intensity.
A common mistake in interval training is to perform at too high an
intensity for the exercise segment and take a rest interval that is too short,
leading to poor recovery and a failed workout. As a general rule, the shorter
the intense portion, the higher the intensity, and the length of the recovery
--- PAGE 114 ---
interval is determined by the energy system used. For example, if you
performed 10 × 100-meter sprints, you want 3 to 5 minutes of slow jogging
or walking recovery between sprints. Why? These sprints use
predominantly the ATP-PC system, which requires 3 to 5 minutes to
replenish.
Interval workouts are usually designed using a work-to-rest ratio. So
someone performing 100 meters in 15 seconds, with 3 minutes of recovery
would have a 1:12 work-to-rest ratio. Someone running 400 meters in 90
seconds, with 3 minutes recovery would have a 1:2 work-to-rest ratio.
Interval workouts are fun and valuable, but they must be designed carefully
to allow the right balance between work and rest. You want to be able to
complete your workout at the right intensity. If your rest interval is too
short, you will not recover, and your last three sprints might be at only 80
percent speed. What’s the point of that? More specific guidelines for
interval training are presented in several of the later chapters.
--- PAGE 115 ---
CHAPTER 6
Raising Anaerobic Threshold
W
e are doing our best to present the chapters and information in a
logical sequence. In other words, it makes sense to develop and
understand aerobic development as you learned in the previous chapter
before worrying about the anaerobic threshold because training the
threshold requires a certain level of aerobic fitness. As you will see in this
chapter, the anaerobic threshold is the most important variable in
competitive fitness because it determines how hard and for how long one
can work. It is not pinpointed at a static percent of MHR, but is a fluid point
of fitness that is generally raised from 75 percent MHR up to 85 percent
MHR once endurance has been developed and stamina training commences
with phase II workouts.
Chapters 1 through 4 provided a background in heart rate response and
measurement and the use of a heart rate monitor. Chapter 5 got you started
on the path to fitness with phase I base training. You also learned how to
develop and enhance endurance by using low-intensity or mixed-intensity
workouts that can greatly improve cardiovascular, respiratory, and muscle
cell function. That path developed a great base of aerobic endurance, which
is the platform that every serious athlete needs to build on in order to
perform better or faster. At some point your aerobic fitness will change very
little regardless of the amount of training you do. However, you can get
fitter and faster, and increasing the anaerobic threshold (AT) might just be
your holy grail. In this chapter, we discuss the AT in greater detail.