--- PAGE 15 ---
6 | Metabolic Training
• Multisport athletes. Multisport athletes deal with movements and metabolic
changes specific to the demands of multiple disciplines. Multisport training
is inherently varied, and cross-training is common. Specific and non-specific
metabolic training would be a logical complement to any multisport regimen.
Multisport athletes could adapt the principles of metabolic training to an array
of sport-specific movements, like simulating contraction velocities, loading of
anatomical regions, and work-rest ratios, to name a few.
• Fitness enthusiasts. Fitness enthusiasts aren’t necessarily interested in improv-
ing competitively. Instead, they enjoy non-competitive activities aimed at improv-
ing one or more physical characteristics, such as agility, balance, coordination,
strength, power, speed, or endurance. Metabolic training could be the perfect
addition to their training routine. In this context, workouts could be used as a
means and an end. In other words, the purpose of the workout is to do the workout.
What’s more, the possibilities for varying exercises, workloads, intensity ranges,
and work-rest ratios are endless.
• Adaptive enthusiasts. Individuals with physical disabilities may want to con-
sider metabolic training as an addition to their existing training programs. Due to
the wide range of physical limitations among individuals, it does not make sense
to make specific recommendations. However, some considerations for program
design should be taken into account. These include participants’ physical safety,
the physical space used as the exercise area, and the support required to perform
a given exercise routine. Cables and dumbbells may offer advantages over barbell
and machine exercises. Additionally, upper-body ergometers, ropes, and medicine
balls used in the three planes of motion—sagittal (front to back), frontal (side to
side), and transverse (rotational)—present viable options for alternative exercises.
In sum, metabolic training lends itself well to a number of different exercise
situations. Exercise combinations, exercise order, rest intervals, workout duration,
exercise intensity, and individual goals can be adapted to suit an individual’s needs
and fitness goals. Metabolic training can be used to educate, motivate, and inspire
individuals looking to push the boundaries of their fitness.
Basic Principles of Metabolic Training
The following principles of exercise are particularly applicable to metabolic train-
ing and should always be considered when designing and implementing metabolic-
training programs. Adhering to these principles will optimize training results.
Measures such as heart rate and rating of perceived exertion (RPE) can be used
to objectively evaluate how the body responds to the exercise stimuli associated
with these training approaches.
1. Overload. The principle of overload refers to the application of a greater
amount of stress than an individual has previously experienced. Increased
intensity, duration, frequency volume, as well as new types of exercise, can
all overload an athlete. For instance, adding a fourth day of running per
week from three days is an overload of training.
--- PAGE 16 ---
Why Metabolic Training? | 7
2.Specificity. According to the principle of specificity, a specific method of train-
ing produces a specific outcome. As an example, someone who consistently
runs long distances will adapt physiologically to long-distance running.
3.FITT. FITT stands for “frequency, intensity, time, and type. ”Frequency refers
to how often you exercise. Intensity is the effort exerted to perform a specific
exercise. Time is the duration of an exercise session. Type indicates the kind
of exercise (cardiorespiratory, strength, or a combination of the two, as well
as the exercise modality).
4.Rest/recovery. Rest or recovery describes breaks taken during an exercise
session—between exercises or between exercise sets—as well as between
one exercise session and the next.
Training intensity can be evaluated using heart-rate monitoring. The higher
the heart rate, the more intense the training, and vice versa. You should know
your resting heart rate and your average heart rate during light to heavy (or very
heavy) exercise. Maximal heart rates can be reached during metabolic training.
It is important to understand that each individual has his own maximal heart
rate (and associated training intensities), and a higher heart rate during the train-
ing session does not mean a greater effort or more intense training. World-class
athletes can have low or high maximal heart rates; neither is a predictor of car-
diorespiratory fitness.
Rating of perceived exertion (RPE) is a subjective measure of how difficult an
exercise is. The RPE scale is typically 1-10, with 1 being the lowest level of exer-
tion and 10 being the highest. The RPE scale is a simple and effective tool that
can be used to determine exercise intensity or the physical demands associated
with a particular exercise.
Workout Structure
The following general guidelines should be followed when designing a workout or
series of workouts over days, weeks, and months. Doing so will ensure a higher-
quality workout and will optimize training.
• Fatigue management. Properly managing fatigue during a workout involves
close monitoring of exercise selection, rest intervals, exercise order, exercise
grouping, training tempo, and workout length. As fatigue accumulates during the
workout, biomechanics and exercise technique can be compromised, which can
present safety issues.
• Speed before strength exercises. Exercises that require higher velocity of move-
ment, like plyometrics or jump squats, should be performed before slower move-
ments. High-velocity movements can tax the nervous system to an extent that
compromises subsequent exercises. In these scenarios, it is advisable to alternate
ground-based speed exercises with upper-body exercises. Split-squat jumps, for
example, could be followed by push-ups.
--- PAGE 17 ---
8 | Metabolic Training
• Technical before gross motor exercises. Metabolic training involves exercises
ranging from low to high demand. Biceps dumbbell curls or jumping jacks, for
example, are exercises that have low technical demands. On the other end of the
spectrum, a power snatch from the floor or a burpee would present high techni-
cal demands. Exercises with higher technical demands, like power movements,
should be performed when fatigue is low. This can mean performing them earlier
in the training session or after exercises that don’t bring about excessive fatigue.
In the context of metabolic training, gross motor exercises should be performed
after technical exercises. For instance, a hang power clean should be performed
after back extensions.
• Multijoint before single-joint exercises. Generally speaking, multijoint exercises
should be performed before single-joint exercises. Multijoint exercises require
more muscle mass and a higher degree of technique, and are more fatiguing, than
single-joint exercises. A sequence of exercises might include a landmine squat to
press followed by a supine triceps extension.
• Exercise grouping. Exercises can be paired or combined to achieve various
objectives, including, but not limited to, managing fatigue, promoting muscle
growth, improving athletic performance, developing power, developing strength,
and calibrating metabolic demand. Participant safety, available equipment, train-
ing goals, and individual limitations are also important considerations when
grouping exercises.
• Exercise demand. Keep in mind that different exercises will have different
levels of metabolic demand. Generally speaking, multijoint ground-based move-
ments will have higher levels of metabolic demand than single-joint, isolated,
machine-based exercises. Exercises that utilize more muscle mass, like squats
and lunges, will have a greater metabolic demand than biceps curls or dumbbell
side raises. For a training program to be successful, demand needs to be carefully
calibrated.
• Unstable and stable surfaces. The efficacy of unstable surfaces in developing
athletic performance is debatable, and the primary goal of metabolic training
is to improve metabolic efficiency and capacity. With that said, medicine balls,
stability balls, balance pads, and balance boards are popular fitness tools. Should
you choose to incorporate unstable surfaces into metabolic training, be aware of
your surroundings and any safety issues they might present. Careful consider-
ation should also be given to exercise selection. For instance, pre-fatiguing the
lower body before performing one-leg squats on a balance pad will increase the
difficulty of the exercise.
• Rest intervals. Although metabolic training can be demanding, there are times
when perceived effort is lower than expected. This is because neuromuscular
fatigue is distributed through different areas of the body, not confined to one
area or muscle group. One way to manage workout intensity or perceived effort
is by changing the rest interval. Longer rest intervals may be warranted after
high metabolic efforts, and shorter rest periods after reduced metabolic efforts.
Keep in mind that metabolic training will tax nearly every major muscle group
--- PAGE 18 ---
Why Metabolic Training? | 9
during each exercise session. A drawback of this approach is the high demand
associated with metabolizing lactate and hydrogen ions and the subsequent high
systemic acidity, especially among untrained individuals. Close monitoring of
fatigue levels and technique is advised.
• Ambient conditions. Ambient conditions—specifically, humidity and tempera-
ture—can affect fatigue. The body strives to sustain an internal temperature of
about 98.6 degrees Fahrenheit. The mechanical work of exercise generates heat. As
body temperature rises, sweat is produced to cool the skin, which helps to main-
tain body temperature. An indoor-gym temperature ranging from the low to high
60s, with moderate airflow, will assist in fatigue moderation. Additionally, lower
humidity will assist in sweat evaporation, which lowers the body’s temperature.
For these reasons, it is recommended that gyms be kept cool and well circulated.
• Safety. Safety considerations for metabolic training include exercise frequency,
intensity, duration, and type, all of which should be determined based on each
participant’s fitness level, as well as appropriate gear selection and proper hydra-
tion. Additionally, adequate time and attention must be devoted to warming up
and cooling down to ensure that the body transitions in and out of periods of
activity safely.
This chapter has covered the fundamental tenets of metabolic training, terms
frequently associated with this style of exercise, and factors that must be consid-
ered when designing an appropriate training program. The most important aspect
of any training program is safety. Though safety is affected by many interrelated
and interdependent factors, we recommend paying particular attention to whether
a training program is appropriate for you and whether your physical environment
is appropriate for exercise. Understanding the topics addressed in this chapter
will help you utilize metabolic training to meet your goals and get the most out
of your exercise program.
--- PAGE 19 ---
This Page Intentionally Left Blank.
--- PAGE 20 ---
2
Physiological Adaptations
to Metabolic Training
Physiological adaptation refers to how the body responds to, accommodates, or
adjusts to exercise. To give an over-simplified example, if you lift heavy weights,
your muscles get bigger. But there are actually a number of adaptations taking
place in response to such a stimulus. These adaptations include a more coordi-
nated neural signal to the activated muscles, uptake of nutrients, and the release
of muscle-building hormones.
Learning about the process of physiological adaptation will help you design
more effective workouts, understand how your body will respond to training,
and know what to expect with consistent and focused training. Two of the most
common fitness goals are burning fat and enhancing muscular development. This
chapter takes a deeper dive into some of the physiological adaptations to training
that can turn these goals into realities.
Adapting to Demands
As discussed in chapter 1, in reference to the specificity principle, adaptations are
specific to imposed demands. Adaptions can be morphological (related to muscle
size), biomechanical (related to strength and power), anatomical (related to muscle,
bone, or fat volumes), neurological (related to motor control), or metabolic (related
to aerobic or anaerobic energy pathways) in nature. Workout parameters such
as intensity level and rest duration can be set to elicit specific adaptations. For
instance, short, high-intensity exercise intervals (up to six seconds in duration,
focusing on quick movement with maximal intensity) paired with longer rest
intervals (1:1 to 1:4 work:rest ratio) can target the short-duration phosphagen meta-
bolic pathway. Conversely, lower-intensity activity paired with shorter-duration
rest intervals can target the aerobic metabolic pathway. Also, keep in mind that
exercises targeting multiple joints and muscle groups at one time are more meta-
bolically challenging than exercises targeting individual joints and muscle groups.
It should be pointed out that metabolic training utilizes both aerobic and anaero-
bic metabolic pathways, while also placing demand on the neuromuscular system
11
--- PAGE 21 ---
12 | Metabolic Training
by way of strength and power exercises. In other situations, metabolic training
can elicit more of an aerobic metabolic (endurance) response—for example, when
lighter weights are used. This de-emphasizes the neuromuscular system. These
two examples represent the various ways in which metabolic training can be pro-
grammed. Neither approach is superior to the other; the optimal program is best
determined by the goals of the program and the individual. With this concept in
mind, both aerobic and anaerobic adaptations can be observed.
Some metabolic-training programs implement strength-power and aerobic
(endurance) methodologies together. This approach is called concurrent training.
Research on the effects of concurrent training has yielded the following conclu-
sions:
• Concurrent training does not appear to compromise gains in aerobic capacity.
• The incorporation of resistance training may have a beneficial effect on
short-term endurance.
• The incorporation of aerobic training may compromise maximal strength in
experienced, resistance-trained individuals.
Consider the intensity of training: Short bursts of high-intensity training target
the anaerobic pathway. Longer-duration efforts, lasting more than three minutes,
start to emphasize the aerobic pathway. Metabolic activity is elevated by anaerobic
efforts of shorter duration if these efforts are performed at high intensity, which
includes heavy resistance training exercise (Herda & Cramer 2016). This idea
constitutes a fundamental element and benefit of metabolic training.
The Role of Excess Postexercise
Oxygen Consumption
It is also worth considering the impact of excess postexercise oxygen consumption
(or EPOC). EPOC refers to the prolonged increase in O that may be observed
2
for hours after exercise. A comprehensive study conducted by Borsheim and Bahr
(2003) determined that heavy resistance training produces greater EPOC than
circuit weight training. In other words, EPOC is intensity dependent in response
to resistance training. This study also found that EPOC is intensity dependent in
relation to aerobic training, with the greatest EPOC values occurring when dura-
tion and intensity were high, and that individuals vary in their response. The
greatest EPOC values were recorded when the intensity of aerobic exercise was
greater than 50 to 60 percent of O max and the duration was equal to or greater
2
than 40 minutes. It would stand to reason that maximal effort toward the end of
a metabolic-training session could optimize EPOC. The benefit of EPOC in the
context of metabolic training is its tendency to increase caloric expenditure and
fat burning above resting levels following the completion of a workout.
The following physiological factors, among others, are responsible for EPOC
(Herda and Cramer 2016):
1. Restoring oxygen in the blood and muscles, which enables the body to return
to its pre-exercise state
--- PAGE 22 ---
Physiological Adaptations to Metabolic Training | 13
2. Resynthesizing energy in the form of ATP, enabling the body to perform at
an optimal level during a subsequent metabolic-training session
3. Elevating body temperature, circulation, and respiration, which aids in
recovery and reduces muscle soreness and fatigue
4. Increasing protein turnover, which enables the body to increase lean body
mass as a training effect.
Short-Term Adaptations to Metabolic Training
Short-term adaptations are those that occur within one to four weeks and are spe-
cifically related to the composition of the training program. For example, heavy
strength training will yield greater increases in strength than low-intensity, high-
rep training programs. Short-term adaptations are relatively transient compared
to long-term adaptions, meaning that if you stop training after one to four weeks,
there is a relatively quick return to pre-training status. In practical terms, this
means that you should remain consistent in your training if you want to continue
to develop strength. It should be noted that nervous-system adaptations occur faster
than structural changes in skeletal muscle. This has led researchers and practi-
tioners to conclude that initial strength improvement is the result of neurological
changes. Even if you can’t see changes in your muscle size or composition early
on in your program, know that your body is adapting and building a foundation
for strength. Stick to your program, and the changes will be noticeable over time.
There are some adaptations that you may notice soon after beginning a met-
abolic-training program. Immediate cardiorespiratory responses to metabolic
training include increases in heart rate, oxygen uptake, systolic blood pressure,
blood flow to active muscles, the heart’s stroke volume, and cardiac output (French
2016). Ventilation rate increases significantly during resistance training (Statler
and Dubois 2016), and especially metabolic training, when short rest intervals
are employed. These improvements to your cardiorespiratory system will allow
you to breathe easier and work harder as you take on more-challenging workouts.
Long-Term Adaptations to Metabolic Training
Following are several adaptions and outcomes that can be achieved when per-
forming metabolic training.
Performance Adaptations
• Increased strength
• Increased endurance
• Increased anaerobic power
• Increased rate of force production
• Increased vertical jump
• Increased aerobic power
--- PAGE 23 ---
14 | Metabolic Training
Adaptations in Muscle Fiber
• Increased cross-sectional area, also known as hypertrophy
• Increases in type I, IIA, or IIB muscle fiber composition
• Increased capillary density
• Increased mitochondrial density
Adaptations in Enzyme Activity
• Increases in enzymes that contribute to strength and power production
Adaptations in Metabolic Energy Stores
• Increased glycogen stores
• Increased creatine phosphate
• Increased ATP storage
• Increased capacity to buffer hydrogen-ion production
Adaptations in Connective Tissue
• Increased ligament strength
• Increased tendon strength
• Possible increases in collagen content
• Possible increases in bone density
The physiological adaptations to metabolic training can be seen in the resto-
ration of oxygen to blood and muscle; the resynthesizing of energy in the form
of ATP; the elevation of body temperature, circulation, and respiration; and
increased protein turnover. These adaptations lead to increased strength, endur-
ance, anaerobic power, force production, and explosive power, as well as a higher
aerobic threshold. Muscular improvements include increased hypertrophy of Type
I, IIA, or IIB muscle fibers and capillary and mitochondrial density. Additional
benefits include improvements to metabolic-energy stores in all energy systems,
improved connective-tissue strength, and greater resistance to injury.
--- PAGE 24 ---
3
Metabolic-Training Tools
The purpose of this chapter is to introduce the nine training tools utilized in our
metabolic workouts. They are
1.bodyweight,
2.dumbbell,
3.kettlebell,
4.resistance band,
5.medicine ball,
6.heavy rope,
7. suspension,
8.weighted sled, and
9.sandbag.
Bodyweight training denotes strength-training exercises in which you move
your body against the resistance of gravity. Dumbbell training utilizes round,
hexagonal, or square weights connected by a short bar, which you lift or swing in
your hand, often in pairs. Kettlebell training provides strength- and cardio-based
exercise using a primitive piece of equipment that looks like a cannonball with
a handle attached. Resistance-band training is a form of strength training that
uses rubber bands of different levels of elasticity. Medicine ball training involves
exercising with a weighted ball to increase muscular strength and endurance.
Heavy-rope training uses ropes of varying lengths and weights, challenging both
cardiorespiratory fitness and muscle strength and endurance. Suspension train-
ing uses ropes and straps to increase the difficulty of bodyweight movements.
Weighted-sled training uses a piece of equipment resembling a sled with rails
or wheels; weight can be added to the sled to increase resistance and emphasize
strength, speed, and power development. Sandbag training is a form of resistance
training that uses a not-quite-full sandbag to improve functional strength, balance,
and cardiorespiratory endurance.
15
--- PAGE 25 ---
16 | Metabolic Training
Bodyweight Training
When it comes to enhancing functional strength, your own body can provide you
with not only the most accessible and cost-effective training tool but in many
ways the most beneficial. Bodyweight-training exercises do not require a gym or
specialized equipment to deliver an effective workout—they can be performed
virtually anywhere. This training style provides you with a functionally based
approach to increasing power, strength, endurance, and flexibility in the pursuit
of muscle development and fat metabolism. Most importantly, bodyweight train-
ing can be done by anyone, regardless of fitness level.
The simplicity of bodyweight training allows you to quickly transfer from
one exercise to another without having to adjust equipment or resistance. This
significantly reduces rest time while keeping your heart rate in a target training
zone and increasing caloric expenditure per unit of time. Bodyweight training is
an excellent way to burn body fat and increase metabolic rate, not only during
exercise but after exercise.
Bodyweight training allows for natural progressions in intensity. Progressions
commonly involve simply adding repetitions or time to an exercise for increased
fitness or changing the movement pattern to increase the demand on strength.
Focusing on volume eliminates the risk of utilizing resistances that may potentially
result in injury while simultaneously improving flexibility by involving a full
range of movement. The engagement of the core musculature required to perform
bodyweight exercises naturally develops core strength and stability, which, in
turn, appears to reduce injury risk (Haff, Berninger, and Caulfield 2016).
In summary, the benefits of bodyweight training can be tied to the use of
functional exercises that are adaptable to all levels of fitness. The use of these
exercises in a workout provides a low-cost training method that increases muscle
strength in several muscle groups at once, develops relative strength, and improves
balance and coordination (Harrison 2011).
Dumbbell Training
Developed over 2,500 years ago, no single piece of fitness equipment has stood
the test of time like the dumbbell. Dumbbells can be found in almost any exercise
environment, be it a high-tech fitness center, boutique fitness center, hard-core
gym, school, hotel, or home gym. Dumbbells offer you the ability to train your
entire body and can be utilized regardless of your level of experience, level of
fitness, age, or training proficiency. They remain a staple for adults looking to
get in shape, youth and professional athletes, tactical professionals, elite fitness
participants, and bodybuilders.
Believed to date back to the ancient Greeks, dumbbells (halteres or alteres, as
they were termed) came in various shapes and sizes and were made from mate-
rials that could be molded in different ways. Other ancient cultures, including
the Indians, Egyptians, and Chinese, are believed to have utilized dumbbell-like
objects as well, although the Greeks are recognized as their creators.
--- PAGE 26 ---
Metabolic-Training Tools | 17
The ancient Greek physician Galen is regarded as the first person to write a
text (ca. 200 AD) on the benefits of exercising with dumbbells (Ford 1955; Ber-
ryman 2012). Other significant exercise-associated works, such as Dialogues des
Gymnastica in 1544 (Todd 2003) and De Arte Gymnastica Aput Ancientes in 1569
(Ford 1955; Todd 2003), discuss dumbbell training as well. The term dumbbell was
believed to have been coined in England during the 16th century, when athletes
trained with handheld bells from which the clappers had been removed. Once
the clappers were removed, the bells became silent, which gave rise to the name
“dumbbells.” In 1864, with the release of John Blundell’s book The Muscles and
Their Story (Todd 2003), dumbbells became even more popular. Ranging from 3
to 100 pounds (1.4 to 45.4 kilograms), they became increasingly commonplace
among fitness enthusiasts everywhere and established themselves as standard
pieces of gym equipment.
On February 14, 1865, the first plate-loaded dumbbell was patented. Today,
there are three different types of dumbbells, each of which offers benefits. Adjust-
able dumbbells consist of a short metal bar that is slightly knurled in the middle
to improve hand grip. Weight plates can be slid onto each end and secured with
collars. Adjustable dumbbells are quickly adaptable to weight changes and can be
utilized to exercise all muscle groups. Fixed-weight dumbbells are often referred
to as gym-style dumbbells because they are most often found in gyms. While
they do not offer the versatility of adjustable dumbbells, a complete set of fixed
dumbbells allows you to change weights quickly. Selectorized dumbbells are
designed to maximize your training time by offering a single pair of dumbbells
that can be quickly adjusted using a selector pin or dial to set the desired weight.
Training with dumbbells produces favorable alterations in the muscular,
nervous, endocrine, and cardiorespiratory systems, as well as connective-tissue
improvements (Ratames and Izquierdo 2008).
• Muscular-system adaptations involve increases in muscle-fiber angle and
length, muscle size, muscle fiber type transition (Type I to Type II), pre-
exercise energy-substrate levels, protein concentration, fiber number, oxida-
tive capacity (with higher-volume training), and fatigue resistance.
• Neural alterations include increased muscle-fiber recruitment and potentia-
tion, as well as fatigue resistance, which leads to a higher training capacity.
• Benefits to connective tissue include increases in bone-mineral density, tendon
and ligament size, and tendon and ligament strength.
• Cardiorespiratory improvements encompass acute cardiac output and stroke
volume increases.
• Metabolic alterations are tied to three energy systems:
1. Phosphagen energy system. Provides energy for short-term, high-intensity
exercise of 0 to 30 seconds
2. Glycolytic energy system. Provides energy for exercise of 30 seconds to 2
minutes
--- PAGE 27 ---
18 | Metabolic Training
Training Safely with Dumbbells
When training with dumbbells, safety precautions should be taken to reduce the poten-
tial for injury. Complete adequate movement preparation and a dynamic warm-up prior
to a training session. Start with lighter weights and progress to heavier weights when
performing multiple sets. Select a weight that will provide maximum training benefits
without forcing you to sacrifice correct technique and risk getting injured.
Maintain an erect, firm torso and lift the dumbbells from a rack or the floor using your
legs, bending at the knees and maintaining a flat back. Enlist the assistance of a spotter
when needed to ensure correct form and lift safety. Consult with a medical professional
(physician or physical therapist) if you experience persistent or recurring pain or any pain
prior to or after starting a lifting program.
3. Oxidative energy system. Provides energy for exercise of 2 minutes or
greater (Herda and Cramer 2016).
Dumbbells offer an operative means to focus on major muscle groups of the
entire body. They can be utilized in a gym, at home, or outdoors with no required
installation or setup. Exercising with dumbbells necessitates greater stabilization,
recruiting a greater number of secondary muscle groups than machine exercises
and forcing limbs to work individually, which helps to prevent imbalances.
Kettlebell Training
Just about any gym, regardless of the population it serves, has kettlebells in its
strength-training or group-exercise areas. While the use of kettlebells in the
United States is new, training for strength and fitness with kettlebells can be
traced back centuries to their Eastern European roots (Harrison, Schoenfeld, and
Schoenfeld 2011). A kettlebell consists of an iron handle attached to an iron ball
(Cotter 2022). Kettlebell training offers a safer alternative to heavy-load lifting,
targeting weaknesses and imbalances and correcting them through short, high-
intensity workouts that increase hormonal production for muscle development
and keep cortisol levels low.
Kettlebells have been studied more recently by strength and conditioning
researchers interested in these tools’ ability to enhance strength, power, and car-
diorespiratory fitness in individuals ranging from novice exercisers to elite-level
athletes and fitness enthusiasts (Beardsley and Contreras 2014). The benefits of
kettlebell training are numerous. Kettlebell training has been shown to increase
overall strength and power production (Jay et al. 2011); improve core strength by
emphasizing power, acceleration, and multiplanar and unilateral movement pat-
terns (Lake and Lauder 2012); encourage the production of force and speed through
the hips (Otto et al. 2012); and promote the development of lean body mass through
high-repetition sets combined with short rest periods. Often-neglected muscles of
the back of the body (core, shoulders, hips) are targeted, which improves posture
--- PAGE 28 ---
Metabolic-Training Tools | 19
and posterior-chain function (Jay et al. 2011). Kettlebell training has also been
shown to improve grip strength, which enables other strength gains (Manocchia
et al. 2013).
Because of its emphasis on higher volume and shorter rest periods, kettlebell
training is associated with increased caloric expenditure per unit of time (20
calories per minute), resulting in increased metabolism during and after training,
increased fat metabolism, increased muscular endurance, and better cardiorespi-
ratory function (Jay et al. 2011). Kettlebells provide the user with one piece of
exercise equipment to train the entire body (Jay et al. 2011). If you are limited with
space at home or want to minimize your movement around the gym, kettlebells
are the perfect tools to simplify your workout. Kettlebell training uses dynamic
movement patterns that increase mobility, proprioception, flexibility, and body
awareness by forcing the user to move through all three planes of motion in a
controlled, fluid manner. With kettlebells, stabilizing muscle groups are trained
in combination with primary muscles, leading to improved joint stability, coor-
dination, and balance (Manocchia et al. 2013). Finally, kettlebells offer a fun and
exciting way to train because the exercises are based on movement patterns and
require you to be more engaged (Jay et al. 2011).
When performing kettlebell exercises, use the grip position (neutral grip, with
palms facing in; supinated grip, with palms facing up; or pronated grip, with palms
facing down) and hold position (at your side, between your palms, in your palm,
or upside down) that best suits each exercise (Cotter 2022). When performing an
exercise in a standing position, place your feet slightly wider than shoulder-width
apart. With training resistances between 80 and 100 percent of your repetition
maximum (the maximum resistance you can utilize with a given volume and
intensity), avoid holding your breath—you should continue to inhale and exhale
throughout the movement (Haff, Berninger, and Caulfield 2016).
Resistance-Band Training
Resistance bands have become a staple of just about every fitness environment.
Resistance bands come in three basic forms: tube, loop, and mini. Each of the
three types provides unique benefits. Resistance bands come in a variety of
colors often with handles. The color of a resistance band designates its tension
level. What makes resistance-band training unique is that tension increases as
the bands are stretched, meaning that resistance increases as more muscle groups
are incorporated in a movement pattern (Haff, Berninger, and Caulfield 2016).
Resistance bands can be used at any fitness level and any age. Youth, adults,
seniors, competitive athletes, tactical professionals, and individuals with chronic
conditions or disorders can all benefit from resistance-band training. Addition-
ally, resistance bands are among the most inexpensive pieces of equipment and
can easily be packed in a suitcase and utilized anywhere.
Resistance bands are beneficial for metabolic training because they can be
used safely and effectively at higher volumes with shorter rest periods. Training
with resistance bands is an excellent way to reduce body fat and simultaneously
--- PAGE 29 ---
20 | Metabolic Training
develop muscle. In conjunction with dietary changes, resistance bands can bring
about significant physiological changes when used three to five times per week.
Resistance bands are frequently used while warming up and cooling down.
In this context, they serve as an excellent primer, increasing heart rate and joint
mobility through dynamic range-of-motion movements at reduced resistances.
Following this approach ensures that there is adequate blood flow to the exer-
cising muscles and the heart before higher-resistance exercise commences. The
use of resistance bands as part of the postworkout cool-down can improve blood
flow, reduce muscle soreness, and prevent injuries by enhancing stretches and
flexibility exercises (Page and Ellenbecker 2020).
Resistance bands are excellent tools for increasing muscle strength and endur-
ance, and they can be used to simulate many of the same exercises performed
with barbells and dumbbells. They also lend themselves well to developing explo-
sive power, through multijoint exercises as well as exercises that target specific
muscle groups. The unstable, elastic nature of resistance bands means that users
will recruit secondary and stabilizing muscle groups when working with them.
Resistance bands also allow exercisers to increase range of motion in a manner
that is safe for the joints and the spine.
Resistance bands can serve as an excellent tool to assist with bodyweight
movements and other strength-training exercises. When utilized with bodyweight
exercises, they can decrease bodyweight, for movements such as the pull-up, or
increase resistance, for movements like the bodyweight squat. Adding bands to
traditional strength-training exercises, such as the bench press or the squat, can
increase the demands on muscle stabilization and power throughout the lift.
Resistance bands are effective in targeting all three planes of movement uti-
lized in sports and other fitness activities. Please refer to chapter 1 for a review
of planes of motion. Sagittal-plane movements are movements that occur forward
and backward. Frontal-plane movements are movements that occur side to side.
One of the most important planes for functional movement is the transverse plane.
Movement in the transverse plane is rotational in nature and can vary in speed.
Developing power, muscle strength, and endurance in the transverse plane not
only increases power for functional movement but also reduces injury risk from
rotational movements.
By following the FITT principle and adjusting training frequency (number of
sessions per week), intensity (band resistance), type (exercise selection), and time
(pace of the exercise, including movement speed, exercise volume, and recovery
between sets or exercises), exercisers can use resistance bands to reach physiologi-
cal and athletic goals, such as developing lean body mass, losing fat, increasing
strength and conditioning levels, and enhancing sports performance. For example,
performing higher-repetition sets with shorter rest periods can be effective in
increasing lean body mass and burning body fat, while lower-repetition sets
paired with longer rest periods can be effective in increasing strength, power, and
technical skill. Based on the goals of the program, training loads and recovery
periods can be assigned based on the repetition maximum (the maximum amount
--- PAGE 30 ---
Metabolic-Training Tools | 21
of resistance that can be used to perform a given number of repetitions and sets
with structured recovery periods) (Sheppard and Triplett 2016).
Medicine Ball Training
Medicine balls can be traced back to ancient Persia, Greece, and Rome, where
they were used by athletes to increase strength, power, and athletic performance.
It is believed that the ancient Greeks stuffed animal skins for patients to toss for
medicinal purposes. A similar type of ball is believed to have been used in Persia
in the 1700s. The term medicine ball can be dated back to 1876 (Roberts 2020). Hip-
pocrates believed them to be an essential tool for helping people regain normal body
movement after injury, as well as a means for enhancing and maintaining overall
health. Few, if any, pieces of equipment are versatile in the way that medicine
balls are: not only can they be lifted, but they can also be thrown and slammed.
The adaptability of medicine balls enables users to utilize nontraditional methods
to expand training goals and objectives. In addition, nearly every medicine ball
exercise can be combined with other exercises to create a continuous flow with
minimal rest. This is beneficial for two reasons:
1. It mimics functional movements used in everyday life.
2. It enables users to program any number of exercise combinations and varia-
tions.
Today, medicine balls are used to develop power, strength, anaerobic endurance,
and cardiorespiratory fitness.
Medicine balls can be soft or firm, can come with or without handles, and can
vary in weight from 2 to 100 pounds (0.9 to 45.4 kilograms). Medicine ball training
has a wide spectrum of applications, ranging from injury rehabilitation to strength
and sports-performance enhancement (Faigenbaum et al. 2006; Hagberg et al.
2009). Its ability to recruit a significant number of muscle groups and to develop
explosive power through functional movement makes medicine ball training an
essential tool in fitness, rehabilitation, and sports performance (Vincent, Traywick,
and Washburn 2013). When training with a medicine ball, perform 10 to 15 reps
or perform reps for a designated time, provided that you can do so with good form
(Faigenbaum et al. 2006). When selecting a medicine ball, it is important to choose
one heavy enough to reduce movement speed but not so heavy that technique,
form, and range of motion will be negatively impacted. Medicine balls weighing
between 4 and 15 pounds (1.8 to 6.8 kilograms) are generally recommended as a
starting point (Faigenbaum et al. 2006; Vincent, Traywick, and Washburn 2013).
Medicine ball training can be effective as a fat-burning exercise when periods of
high-intensity, high-volume training are implemented to maximize caloric expen-
diture. This results in an increased postexercise metabolic effect as well. Training
with medicine balls allows exercisers to utilize their full range of movement, which
is important for developing total-body strength. Medicine balls also lend themselves
to developing strength in the context of sports that require rotational movement.