--- PAGE 21 ---
12 | Metabolic Training
by way of strength and power exercises. In other situations, metabolic training
can elicit more of an aerobic metabolic (endurance) response—for example, when
lighter weights are used. This de-emphasizes the neuromuscular system. These
two examples represent the various ways in which metabolic training can be pro-
grammed. Neither approach is superior to the other; the optimal program is best
determined by the goals of the program and the individual. With this concept in
mind, both aerobic and anaerobic adaptations can be observed.
Some metabolic-training programs implement strength-power and aerobic
(endurance) methodologies together. This approach is called concurrent training.
Research on the effects of concurrent training has yielded the following conclu-
sions:
• Concurrent training does not appear to compromise gains in aerobic capacity.
• The incorporation of resistance training may have a beneficial effect on
short-term endurance.
• The incorporation of aerobic training may compromise maximal strength in
experienced, resistance-trained individuals.
Consider the intensity of training: Short bursts of high-intensity training target
the anaerobic pathway. Longer-duration efforts, lasting more than three minutes,
start to emphasize the aerobic pathway. Metabolic activity is elevated by anaerobic
efforts of shorter duration if these efforts are performed at high intensity, which
includes heavy resistance training exercise (Herda & Cramer 2016). This idea
constitutes a fundamental element and benefit of metabolic training.
The Role of Excess Postexercise
Oxygen Consumption
It is also worth considering the impact of excess postexercise oxygen consumption
(or EPOC). EPOC refers to the prolonged increase in O that may be observed
2
for hours after exercise. A comprehensive study conducted by Borsheim and Bahr
(2003) determined that heavy resistance training produces greater EPOC than
circuit weight training. In other words, EPOC is intensity dependent in response
to resistance training. This study also found that EPOC is intensity dependent in
relation to aerobic training, with the greatest EPOC values occurring when dura-
tion and intensity were high, and that individuals vary in their response. The
greatest EPOC values were recorded when the intensity of aerobic exercise was
greater than 50 to 60 percent of O max and the duration was equal to or greater
2
than 40 minutes. It would stand to reason that maximal effort toward the end of
a metabolic-training session could optimize EPOC. The benefit of EPOC in the
context of metabolic training is its tendency to increase caloric expenditure and
fat burning above resting levels following the completion of a workout.
The following physiological factors, among others, are responsible for EPOC
(Herda and Cramer 2016):
1. Restoring oxygen in the blood and muscles, which enables the body to return
to its pre-exercise state
--- PAGE 22 ---
Physiological Adaptations to Metabolic Training | 13
2. Resynthesizing energy in the form of ATP, enabling the body to perform at
an optimal level during a subsequent metabolic-training session
3. Elevating body temperature, circulation, and respiration, which aids in
recovery and reduces muscle soreness and fatigue
4. Increasing protein turnover, which enables the body to increase lean body
mass as a training effect.
Short-Term Adaptations to Metabolic Training
Short-term adaptations are those that occur within one to four weeks and are spe-
cifically related to the composition of the training program. For example, heavy
strength training will yield greater increases in strength than low-intensity, high-
rep training programs. Short-term adaptations are relatively transient compared
to long-term adaptions, meaning that if you stop training after one to four weeks,
there is a relatively quick return to pre-training status. In practical terms, this
means that you should remain consistent in your training if you want to continue
to develop strength. It should be noted that nervous-system adaptations occur faster
than structural changes in skeletal muscle. This has led researchers and practi-
tioners to conclude that initial strength improvement is the result of neurological
changes. Even if you can’t see changes in your muscle size or composition early
on in your program, know that your body is adapting and building a foundation
for strength. Stick to your program, and the changes will be noticeable over time.
There are some adaptations that you may notice soon after beginning a met-
abolic-training program. Immediate cardiorespiratory responses to metabolic
training include increases in heart rate, oxygen uptake, systolic blood pressure,
blood flow to active muscles, the heart’s stroke volume, and cardiac output (French
2016). Ventilation rate increases significantly during resistance training (Statler
and Dubois 2016), and especially metabolic training, when short rest intervals
are employed. These improvements to your cardiorespiratory system will allow
you to breathe easier and work harder as you take on more-challenging workouts.
Long-Term Adaptations to Metabolic Training
Following are several adaptions and outcomes that can be achieved when per-
forming metabolic training.
Performance Adaptations
• Increased strength
• Increased endurance
• Increased anaerobic power
• Increased rate of force production
• Increased vertical jump
• Increased aerobic power
--- PAGE 23 ---
14 | Metabolic Training
Adaptations in Muscle Fiber
• Increased cross-sectional area, also known as hypertrophy
• Increases in type I, IIA, or IIB muscle fiber composition
• Increased capillary density
• Increased mitochondrial density
Adaptations in Enzyme Activity
• Increases in enzymes that contribute to strength and power production
Adaptations in Metabolic Energy Stores
• Increased glycogen stores
• Increased creatine phosphate
• Increased ATP storage
• Increased capacity to buffer hydrogen-ion production
Adaptations in Connective Tissue
• Increased ligament strength
• Increased tendon strength
• Possible increases in collagen content
• Possible increases in bone density
The physiological adaptations to metabolic training can be seen in the resto-
ration of oxygen to blood and muscle; the resynthesizing of energy in the form
of ATP; the elevation of body temperature, circulation, and respiration; and
increased protein turnover. These adaptations lead to increased strength, endur-
ance, anaerobic power, force production, and explosive power, as well as a higher
aerobic threshold. Muscular improvements include increased hypertrophy of Type
I, IIA, or IIB muscle fibers and capillary and mitochondrial density. Additional
benefits include improvements to metabolic-energy stores in all energy systems,
improved connective-tissue strength, and greater resistance to injury.
--- PAGE 24 ---
3
Metabolic-Training Tools
The purpose of this chapter is to introduce the nine training tools utilized in our
metabolic workouts. They are
1.bodyweight,
2.dumbbell,
3.kettlebell,
4.resistance band,
5.medicine ball,
6.heavy rope,
7. suspension,
8.weighted sled, and
9.sandbag.
Bodyweight training denotes strength-training exercises in which you move
your body against the resistance of gravity. Dumbbell training utilizes round,
hexagonal, or square weights connected by a short bar, which you lift or swing in
your hand, often in pairs. Kettlebell training provides strength- and cardio-based
exercise using a primitive piece of equipment that looks like a cannonball with
a handle attached. Resistance-band training is a form of strength training that
uses rubber bands of different levels of elasticity. Medicine ball training involves
exercising with a weighted ball to increase muscular strength and endurance.
Heavy-rope training uses ropes of varying lengths and weights, challenging both
cardiorespiratory fitness and muscle strength and endurance. Suspension train-
ing uses ropes and straps to increase the difficulty of bodyweight movements.
Weighted-sled training uses a piece of equipment resembling a sled with rails
or wheels; weight can be added to the sled to increase resistance and emphasize
strength, speed, and power development. Sandbag training is a form of resistance
training that uses a not-quite-full sandbag to improve functional strength, balance,
and cardiorespiratory endurance.
15
--- PAGE 25 ---
16 | Metabolic Training
Bodyweight Training
When it comes to enhancing functional strength, your own body can provide you
with not only the most accessible and cost-effective training tool but in many
ways the most beneficial. Bodyweight-training exercises do not require a gym or
specialized equipment to deliver an effective workout—they can be performed
virtually anywhere. This training style provides you with a functionally based
approach to increasing power, strength, endurance, and flexibility in the pursuit
of muscle development and fat metabolism. Most importantly, bodyweight train-
ing can be done by anyone, regardless of fitness level.
The simplicity of bodyweight training allows you to quickly transfer from
one exercise to another without having to adjust equipment or resistance. This
significantly reduces rest time while keeping your heart rate in a target training
zone and increasing caloric expenditure per unit of time. Bodyweight training is
an excellent way to burn body fat and increase metabolic rate, not only during
exercise but after exercise.
Bodyweight training allows for natural progressions in intensity. Progressions
commonly involve simply adding repetitions or time to an exercise for increased
fitness or changing the movement pattern to increase the demand on strength.
Focusing on volume eliminates the risk of utilizing resistances that may potentially
result in injury while simultaneously improving flexibility by involving a full
range of movement. The engagement of the core musculature required to perform
bodyweight exercises naturally develops core strength and stability, which, in
turn, appears to reduce injury risk (Haff, Berninger, and Caulfield 2016).
In summary, the benefits of bodyweight training can be tied to the use of
functional exercises that are adaptable to all levels of fitness. The use of these
exercises in a workout provides a low-cost training method that increases muscle
strength in several muscle groups at once, develops relative strength, and improves
balance and coordination (Harrison 2011).
Dumbbell Training
Developed over 2,500 years ago, no single piece of fitness equipment has stood
the test of time like the dumbbell. Dumbbells can be found in almost any exercise
environment, be it a high-tech fitness center, boutique fitness center, hard-core
gym, school, hotel, or home gym. Dumbbells offer you the ability to train your
entire body and can be utilized regardless of your level of experience, level of
fitness, age, or training proficiency. They remain a staple for adults looking to
get in shape, youth and professional athletes, tactical professionals, elite fitness
participants, and bodybuilders.
Believed to date back to the ancient Greeks, dumbbells (halteres or alteres, as
they were termed) came in various shapes and sizes and were made from mate-
rials that could be molded in different ways. Other ancient cultures, including
the Indians, Egyptians, and Chinese, are believed to have utilized dumbbell-like
objects as well, although the Greeks are recognized as their creators.
--- PAGE 26 ---
Metabolic-Training Tools | 17
The ancient Greek physician Galen is regarded as the first person to write a
text (ca. 200 AD) on the benefits of exercising with dumbbells (Ford 1955; Ber-
ryman 2012). Other significant exercise-associated works, such as Dialogues des
Gymnastica in 1544 (Todd 2003) and De Arte Gymnastica Aput Ancientes in 1569
(Ford 1955; Todd 2003), discuss dumbbell training as well. The term dumbbell was
believed to have been coined in England during the 16th century, when athletes
trained with handheld bells from which the clappers had been removed. Once
the clappers were removed, the bells became silent, which gave rise to the name
“dumbbells.” In 1864, with the release of John Blundell’s book The Muscles and
Their Story (Todd 2003), dumbbells became even more popular. Ranging from 3
to 100 pounds (1.4 to 45.4 kilograms), they became increasingly commonplace
among fitness enthusiasts everywhere and established themselves as standard
pieces of gym equipment.
On February 14, 1865, the first plate-loaded dumbbell was patented. Today,
there are three different types of dumbbells, each of which offers benefits. Adjust-
able dumbbells consist of a short metal bar that is slightly knurled in the middle
to improve hand grip. Weight plates can be slid onto each end and secured with
collars. Adjustable dumbbells are quickly adaptable to weight changes and can be
utilized to exercise all muscle groups. Fixed-weight dumbbells are often referred
to as gym-style dumbbells because they are most often found in gyms. While
they do not offer the versatility of adjustable dumbbells, a complete set of fixed
dumbbells allows you to change weights quickly. Selectorized dumbbells are
designed to maximize your training time by offering a single pair of dumbbells
that can be quickly adjusted using a selector pin or dial to set the desired weight.
Training with dumbbells produces favorable alterations in the muscular,
nervous, endocrine, and cardiorespiratory systems, as well as connective-tissue
improvements (Ratames and Izquierdo 2008).
• Muscular-system adaptations involve increases in muscle-fiber angle and
length, muscle size, muscle fiber type transition (Type I to Type II), pre-
exercise energy-substrate levels, protein concentration, fiber number, oxida-
tive capacity (with higher-volume training), and fatigue resistance.
• Neural alterations include increased muscle-fiber recruitment and potentia-
tion, as well as fatigue resistance, which leads to a higher training capacity.
• Benefits to connective tissue include increases in bone-mineral density, tendon
and ligament size, and tendon and ligament strength.
• Cardiorespiratory improvements encompass acute cardiac output and stroke
volume increases.
• Metabolic alterations are tied to three energy systems:
1. Phosphagen energy system. Provides energy for short-term, high-intensity
exercise of 0 to 30 seconds
2. Glycolytic energy system. Provides energy for exercise of 30 seconds to 2
minutes
--- PAGE 27 ---
18 | Metabolic Training
Training Safely with Dumbbells
When training with dumbbells, safety precautions should be taken to reduce the poten-
tial for injury. Complete adequate movement preparation and a dynamic warm-up prior
to a training session. Start with lighter weights and progress to heavier weights when
performing multiple sets. Select a weight that will provide maximum training benefits
without forcing you to sacrifice correct technique and risk getting injured.
Maintain an erect, firm torso and lift the dumbbells from a rack or the floor using your
legs, bending at the knees and maintaining a flat back. Enlist the assistance of a spotter
when needed to ensure correct form and lift safety. Consult with a medical professional
(physician or physical therapist) if you experience persistent or recurring pain or any pain
prior to or after starting a lifting program.
3. Oxidative energy system. Provides energy for exercise of 2 minutes or
greater (Herda and Cramer 2016).
Dumbbells offer an operative means to focus on major muscle groups of the
entire body. They can be utilized in a gym, at home, or outdoors with no required
installation or setup. Exercising with dumbbells necessitates greater stabilization,
recruiting a greater number of secondary muscle groups than machine exercises
and forcing limbs to work individually, which helps to prevent imbalances.
Kettlebell Training
Just about any gym, regardless of the population it serves, has kettlebells in its
strength-training or group-exercise areas. While the use of kettlebells in the
United States is new, training for strength and fitness with kettlebells can be
traced back centuries to their Eastern European roots (Harrison, Schoenfeld, and
Schoenfeld 2011). A kettlebell consists of an iron handle attached to an iron ball
(Cotter 2022). Kettlebell training offers a safer alternative to heavy-load lifting,
targeting weaknesses and imbalances and correcting them through short, high-
intensity workouts that increase hormonal production for muscle development
and keep cortisol levels low.
Kettlebells have been studied more recently by strength and conditioning
researchers interested in these tools’ ability to enhance strength, power, and car-
diorespiratory fitness in individuals ranging from novice exercisers to elite-level
athletes and fitness enthusiasts (Beardsley and Contreras 2014). The benefits of
kettlebell training are numerous. Kettlebell training has been shown to increase
overall strength and power production (Jay et al. 2011); improve core strength by
emphasizing power, acceleration, and multiplanar and unilateral movement pat-
terns (Lake and Lauder 2012); encourage the production of force and speed through
the hips (Otto et al. 2012); and promote the development of lean body mass through
high-repetition sets combined with short rest periods. Often-neglected muscles of
the back of the body (core, shoulders, hips) are targeted, which improves posture
--- PAGE 28 ---
Metabolic-Training Tools | 19
and posterior-chain function (Jay et al. 2011). Kettlebell training has also been
shown to improve grip strength, which enables other strength gains (Manocchia
et al. 2013).
Because of its emphasis on higher volume and shorter rest periods, kettlebell
training is associated with increased caloric expenditure per unit of time (20
calories per minute), resulting in increased metabolism during and after training,
increased fat metabolism, increased muscular endurance, and better cardiorespi-
ratory function (Jay et al. 2011). Kettlebells provide the user with one piece of
exercise equipment to train the entire body (Jay et al. 2011). If you are limited with
space at home or want to minimize your movement around the gym, kettlebells
are the perfect tools to simplify your workout. Kettlebell training uses dynamic
movement patterns that increase mobility, proprioception, flexibility, and body
awareness by forcing the user to move through all three planes of motion in a
controlled, fluid manner. With kettlebells, stabilizing muscle groups are trained
in combination with primary muscles, leading to improved joint stability, coor-
dination, and balance (Manocchia et al. 2013). Finally, kettlebells offer a fun and
exciting way to train because the exercises are based on movement patterns and
require you to be more engaged (Jay et al. 2011).
When performing kettlebell exercises, use the grip position (neutral grip, with
palms facing in; supinated grip, with palms facing up; or pronated grip, with palms
facing down) and hold position (at your side, between your palms, in your palm,
or upside down) that best suits each exercise (Cotter 2022). When performing an
exercise in a standing position, place your feet slightly wider than shoulder-width
apart. With training resistances between 80 and 100 percent of your repetition
maximum (the maximum resistance you can utilize with a given volume and
intensity), avoid holding your breath—you should continue to inhale and exhale
throughout the movement (Haff, Berninger, and Caulfield 2016).
Resistance-Band Training
Resistance bands have become a staple of just about every fitness environment.
Resistance bands come in three basic forms: tube, loop, and mini. Each of the
three types provides unique benefits. Resistance bands come in a variety of
colors often with handles. The color of a resistance band designates its tension
level. What makes resistance-band training unique is that tension increases as
the bands are stretched, meaning that resistance increases as more muscle groups
are incorporated in a movement pattern (Haff, Berninger, and Caulfield 2016).
Resistance bands can be used at any fitness level and any age. Youth, adults,
seniors, competitive athletes, tactical professionals, and individuals with chronic
conditions or disorders can all benefit from resistance-band training. Addition-
ally, resistance bands are among the most inexpensive pieces of equipment and
can easily be packed in a suitcase and utilized anywhere.
Resistance bands are beneficial for metabolic training because they can be
used safely and effectively at higher volumes with shorter rest periods. Training
with resistance bands is an excellent way to reduce body fat and simultaneously
--- PAGE 29 ---
20 | Metabolic Training
develop muscle. In conjunction with dietary changes, resistance bands can bring
about significant physiological changes when used three to five times per week.
Resistance bands are frequently used while warming up and cooling down.
In this context, they serve as an excellent primer, increasing heart rate and joint
mobility through dynamic range-of-motion movements at reduced resistances.
Following this approach ensures that there is adequate blood flow to the exer-
cising muscles and the heart before higher-resistance exercise commences. The
use of resistance bands as part of the postworkout cool-down can improve blood
flow, reduce muscle soreness, and prevent injuries by enhancing stretches and
flexibility exercises (Page and Ellenbecker 2020).
Resistance bands are excellent tools for increasing muscle strength and endur-
ance, and they can be used to simulate many of the same exercises performed
with barbells and dumbbells. They also lend themselves well to developing explo-
sive power, through multijoint exercises as well as exercises that target specific
muscle groups. The unstable, elastic nature of resistance bands means that users
will recruit secondary and stabilizing muscle groups when working with them.
Resistance bands also allow exercisers to increase range of motion in a manner
that is safe for the joints and the spine.
Resistance bands can serve as an excellent tool to assist with bodyweight
movements and other strength-training exercises. When utilized with bodyweight
exercises, they can decrease bodyweight, for movements such as the pull-up, or
increase resistance, for movements like the bodyweight squat. Adding bands to
traditional strength-training exercises, such as the bench press or the squat, can
increase the demands on muscle stabilization and power throughout the lift.
Resistance bands are effective in targeting all three planes of movement uti-
lized in sports and other fitness activities. Please refer to chapter 1 for a review
of planes of motion. Sagittal-plane movements are movements that occur forward
and backward. Frontal-plane movements are movements that occur side to side.
One of the most important planes for functional movement is the transverse plane.
Movement in the transverse plane is rotational in nature and can vary in speed.
Developing power, muscle strength, and endurance in the transverse plane not
only increases power for functional movement but also reduces injury risk from
rotational movements.
By following the FITT principle and adjusting training frequency (number of
sessions per week), intensity (band resistance), type (exercise selection), and time
(pace of the exercise, including movement speed, exercise volume, and recovery
between sets or exercises), exercisers can use resistance bands to reach physiologi-
cal and athletic goals, such as developing lean body mass, losing fat, increasing
strength and conditioning levels, and enhancing sports performance. For example,
performing higher-repetition sets with shorter rest periods can be effective in
increasing lean body mass and burning body fat, while lower-repetition sets
paired with longer rest periods can be effective in increasing strength, power, and
technical skill. Based on the goals of the program, training loads and recovery
periods can be assigned based on the repetition maximum (the maximum amount
--- PAGE 30 ---
Metabolic-Training Tools | 21
of resistance that can be used to perform a given number of repetitions and sets
with structured recovery periods) (Sheppard and Triplett 2016).
Medicine Ball Training
Medicine balls can be traced back to ancient Persia, Greece, and Rome, where
they were used by athletes to increase strength, power, and athletic performance.
It is believed that the ancient Greeks stuffed animal skins for patients to toss for
medicinal purposes. A similar type of ball is believed to have been used in Persia
in the 1700s. The term medicine ball can be dated back to 1876 (Roberts 2020). Hip-
pocrates believed them to be an essential tool for helping people regain normal body
movement after injury, as well as a means for enhancing and maintaining overall
health. Few, if any, pieces of equipment are versatile in the way that medicine
balls are: not only can they be lifted, but they can also be thrown and slammed.
The adaptability of medicine balls enables users to utilize nontraditional methods
to expand training goals and objectives. In addition, nearly every medicine ball
exercise can be combined with other exercises to create a continuous flow with
minimal rest. This is beneficial for two reasons:
1. It mimics functional movements used in everyday life.
2. It enables users to program any number of exercise combinations and varia-
tions.
Today, medicine balls are used to develop power, strength, anaerobic endurance,
and cardiorespiratory fitness.
Medicine balls can be soft or firm, can come with or without handles, and can
vary in weight from 2 to 100 pounds (0.9 to 45.4 kilograms). Medicine ball training
has a wide spectrum of applications, ranging from injury rehabilitation to strength
and sports-performance enhancement (Faigenbaum et al. 2006; Hagberg et al.
2009). Its ability to recruit a significant number of muscle groups and to develop
explosive power through functional movement makes medicine ball training an
essential tool in fitness, rehabilitation, and sports performance (Vincent, Traywick,
and Washburn 2013). When training with a medicine ball, perform 10 to 15 reps
or perform reps for a designated time, provided that you can do so with good form
(Faigenbaum et al. 2006). When selecting a medicine ball, it is important to choose
one heavy enough to reduce movement speed but not so heavy that technique,
form, and range of motion will be negatively impacted. Medicine balls weighing
between 4 and 15 pounds (1.8 to 6.8 kilograms) are generally recommended as a
starting point (Faigenbaum et al. 2006; Vincent, Traywick, and Washburn 2013).
Medicine ball training can be effective as a fat-burning exercise when periods of
high-intensity, high-volume training are implemented to maximize caloric expen-
diture. This results in an increased postexercise metabolic effect as well. Training
with medicine balls allows exercisers to utilize their full range of movement, which
is important for developing total-body strength. Medicine balls also lend themselves
to developing strength in the context of sports that require rotational movement.
--- PAGE 31 ---
22 | Metabolic Training
This is accomplished through an increased focus on acceleration. Along with general
strength, increased levels of explosive strength and power can be developed when
performing functional movements using medicine balls. Cardiorespiratory fitness
is another important benefit of utilizing medicine balls in a workout. Performing
total-body medicine ball exercises such as slams for 30 to 45 seconds provides a
strong cardiorespiratory stimulus, along with helping to develop power and strength
(Faigenbaum et al. 2018).
Emphasizing medicine ball exercises that link upper and lower extremities can help
to develop core strength and enhance postural alignment (Haff, Berninger, and Caul-
field 2016). Unlike other training methods (barbells, dumbbells, exercise machines),
medicine ball training enhances functional performance through movements that
combine multiple patterns and planes of motion. For individuals experiencing lower-
back pain or other orthopedic issues, medicine balls can aid rehabilitation by promot-
ing proper alignment, which, in turn, reduces stress to muscles and connective tissue.
Medicine balls are a safe, simple, and effective fitness tool for rehabilitative as
well as fitness- and performance-based exercises, allowing users to focus on strength,
endurance, and recovery with minimal risk for injury. In addition to their train-
ing benefits, medicine ball exercises, which can often be done with a partner or in
a group, provide an opportunity for socialization that is sometimes lacking from
resistance-based exercise.
Heavy Rope, Suspension, Weighted Sleds,
and Sandbag Training
When developing metabolic-training programs, heavy ropes, suspension trainers,
weighted sleds, and sandbags can be valuable additions to traditional training tools.
These alternative pieces of equipment have grown rapidly in popularity and become
staples in metabolic-training programs, alongside traditional training tools (Cissik and
Dawes 2015; Haff, Berninger, and Caulfield 2016). When selecting these implements
for training, consider the advantages and disadvantages of each piece of equipment,
along with your level of fitness. As with all exercise modalities, proper technique
and appropriate assistance are necessary aspects of safe and effective training. Let’s
look at each of these pieces of equipment and consider how they can be used to vary
your training.
Heavy ropes, also known as battle ropes, are thick ropes of varying lengths and
weights that can be linked together, anchored, or wrapped around a pole or training
rack. Heavy ropes are a fun alternative to traditional strength training and condition-
ing, and can be used by people of all ages and fitness levels. The benefits of using
heavy ropes include the following:
• Expend calories and burn fat through continuous moderate- to high-intensity
exercise.
• Get a total-body workout by combining the upper-body focus of the ropes with
lower-body lunging, jumping, and squatting while performing rope exercises.
• Participate in a lower-impact cardiorespiratory activity that greatly reduces the
impact to joints associated with some traditional cardiorespiratory activities.
--- PAGE 32 ---
Metabolic-Training Tools | 23
• Increase grip strength, upper-extremity strength and power, and triple-
extension strength and power from the hip, knee, and ankle.
• Increase or decrease the resistance used by standing closer or farther away
from the anchoring point, respectively.
• Correct muscle imbalances through the independent movement of the ropes
with each hand, using alternating grips and varying movement directions.
• Improve dynamic and static flexibility through constant motion and stretch,
and improve stability by maintaining a stable base.
• Develop stability and balance by working against gravity and overcoming
the force of the ropes.
Suspension training involves the use of two sets of adjustable bands, buckles, and
handles that can be attached overhead to a stable rack or training bar. Suspension
training provides a limitless variety of exercises, helping to prevent boredom and
lack of motivation. The benefits of using a suspension trainer include the following:
• Train all the muscles of the body in a functional manner and easily adjust
resistance by changing the angle between the body and the floor.
• Correct muscle imbalances by providing a unilateral approach to training.
• Enhance cardiorespiratory fitness by enabling quick transition from one
exercise to another while keeping heart rate elevated.
• Get an effective moderate- to high-intensity workout with minimal stress
and impact on the joints.
• Aid in recovery from injury by improving range of motion, functional
movement, and flexibility while minimizing stress and further injury to the
affected body part.
• Enhance the balance, flexibility, coordination, and stability of muscles of the
upper extremity, the pelvis, the lower back, and the abdomen, making the
suspension trainer an excellent training implement for the core.
• Ramp up bodyweight training by placing the feet instead of the hands in the
handles for specific movements.
Weighted-sled training can be traced back to ancient logging communities that
used sleds to transport heavy trees from forests. Today, weighted sleds allow ath-
letes in a variety of sports and fitness programs to increase power, muscle strength
and endurance, and cardiorespiratory fitness. Weighted-sled training involves the
use of a multifunctional exercise tool that can be loaded with weight to increase
resistance. Weighted sleds come in a variety of shapes and sizes and can be pushed,
pulled, or dragged. The benefits of using a weighted sled include the following:
• Increase functional fitness by incorporating numerous muscles and joints
in a multijoint format to increase upper-body, lower-body, and core strength
and power.
• Improve both anaerobic and aerobic conditioning by using heavier or lighter
resistances for various distances or periods of time.
--- PAGE 33 ---
24 | Metabolic Training
• Because weighted-sled training only involves the concentric movement (short-
ening) of muscles against resistance, and not eccentric movement (lengthen-
ing), it’s an excellent form of training for injury prevention.
• The enhanced muscle stimulation provided by constant resistance with each
push, pull, or drag enhances acceleration capability for athletic, tactical,
functional, and fitness performance.
Sandbags have been a popular training option for tactical professionals and
strongmen for many years. More recently, sandbags have become popular in fit-
ness, metabolic, and sports training programs. Sandbags offer several training
benefits, including the following:
• Achieve maximum muscle recruitment when performing multijoint exercises
(cleans, squats, rows, etc.).
• Train for strength, power, muscle development, or endurance by using sand-
bags of different weights.
• Develop strength and reduce the risk of injury by training in all three planes
of motion: sagittal (movement forward and backward), frontal (movement
side to side), and transverse (rotational). Please refer to chapter 1 for a review
of planes of motion.
• Improve balanced strength and muscle development in all muscle groups
as well as increase grip strength through the challenge of shifting weight
in sandbags. This is particularly beneficial for learning to control awkward
movements in daily life, professional activities, and athletics.
• Enjoy the convenience and value of sandbags: An adjustment in weight
requires nothing more than inexpensive sand to be added or removed; sandbag
training can be done anywhere with a limited amount of space; sandbags
are easy to empty to travel with and reload when traveling; and sandbags
provide a challenging workout to increase strength and metabolic fitness
with minimal equipment.
Conclusion
Metabolic training employs a variety of training modalities. In order to understand
your options in full, you need to understand the benefits offered by bodyweight,
dumbbells, kettlebells, resistance bands, medicine balls, heavy ropes, suspen-
sion, weighted sleds, and sandbags. Consider your level of fitness to determine
which training modalities to use in your program. As an example, bodyweight
and dumbbell exercises may be more appropriate for beginners. Conversely, an
exerciser with a higher level of fitness may receive additional benefits from a
metabolic-training program incorporating kettlebells, medicine balls, suspension
trainer, sandbags, weighted sleds, and heavy ropes. No matter the implement
used, frequency, intensity, and volume of training should be adjusted to suit each
individual’s fitness level.
--- PAGE 34 ---
4
Periodization for
Metabolic Training
Periodization is the variation of training over a period of time in order to achieve
an optimal outcome. Or, in more detailed terms, “Periodization is a theoretical
and practical construct that allows for the systematic, sequential, and integrative
programing of training interventions into mutually dependent periods of time
in order to induce specific physiological adaptations that underpin performance
outcomes” (Haff 2016). Another way to think of it is that periodization is the con-
cept, and programming (sets, reps, exercises, weight used, days per week, etc.)
is the application.
Components of Periodization
There are three concepts central to understanding periodization: general adap-
tation syndrome, stimulus–fatigue–recovery–adaptation (SFRA) theory, and the
fitness–fatigue paradigm. In the following, we explain what they are and how
they fit into metabolic training.
General Adaptation Syndrome
This theory is the most fundamental to physical training. When you perform a
training session that takes your body beyond its current state, you’re applying
a stress to your systems. The body initially responds to the stress in an alarm
stage where fatigue is experienced possibly in the form of soreness or stiffness
in, generally, the first 24 to 48 hours following your training session. After this
alarm stage the body transitions into the resistance stage and the body further
adapts to the stress. In the final stage, the body experiences what is known as
supercompensation. Upon reaching the supercompensation stage, the body is at a
higher level of adaptation which means you are becoming stronger or fitter than
you were before the training.
Stimulus–Fatigue–Recovery–Adaptation Theory
The SFRA theory suggests that training stimuli produce a general response (Haff
2016). The greater the magnitude of the stimulus or workload, the greater the
25
--- PAGE 35 ---
26 | Metabolic Training
fatigue response. In other words, there is a direct positive correlation between
training workload and fatigue. As you adapt to the training workload, however,
your fatigue will lessen. When a new training stimulus is introduced, the adap-
tation cycle continues. The SFRA theory emphasizes timing or scheduling of
interventions and is essential to optimizing training effects. Keep in mind that
if you stop training after a single intervention, you will return to your untrained
state. Consistency is key to maximizing your results.
Complete recovery is often not reached after training interventions. However,
partial recovery does often occur, and training programs should have the fre-
quency, intensity, and volume of training adjusted in such a manner to optimize
results. The general trend is to gradually decrease volume of training while
increasing intensity. This concept is central to periodization.
Fitness–Fatigue Paradigm
The fitness–fatigue paradigm posits a relationship between fitness and fatigue
known as the “state of readiness” (Haff 2016; see figure 4.1). This model was first
proposed by the sport scientist Vladimir Zatsiorsky (Zatsiorsky & Kraemer 2006).
There is a direct positive relationship between volume load of training and fatigue,
where volume load refers to amount of weight times the number of repetitions
assigned to an exercise. As an example, 10 reps at 100 pounds (45.4 kilograms)
performed for three sets results in a volume load of 3,000 pounds (1,360.7 kilo-
grams) for that exercise. The volume load of an exercise for a specific period of
time (a day, a week, a month, etc.) can be quickly calculated by multiplying reps
by weight by sets. The importance of accumulated fatigue as a result of volume
load cannot be overstated.
Fitness is elevated, but
the cumulative fatigue
Preparedness is
decreases preparedness
optimized as fatigue
dissipates at a faster
rate than fitness
Training
stimulus
Fitness Involution
Preparedness
Fatigue
Figure 4.1 The fitness–fatigue paradigm.
Adapted by permission from G.G. Haff and E.E. Haff, “Training Integration and Periodization,” in NSCA’s Guide to Program
Design, edited by J. Hoffman (Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics, 2012), 219.
E8570/Graham/F 04.01/705072/pulled/R2
--- PAGE 36 ---
Periodization for Metabolic Training | 27
Accumulated fatigue recedes more quickly than fitness. A reduction in volume
load, or perhaps cessation of training, can potentiate a peak in fitness. This con-
cept is also central to periodization.
Training Principles of a Periodization Model
There are several models of periodization that can be applied to metabolic train-
ing programs For the purpose of this book we will focus on block, linear, and
undulating periodization. These models adjust training volume and intensity over
a period of time in an effort to avoid mental and physical stagnation. It is impor-
tant to remember that proper fatigue management during the training session
and between training sessions is a central element of metabolic training. For the
purposes of metabolic training, we will provide frequency, intensity, and volume
guidelines to ensure fatigue management in very general terms.
Block Periodization
The general approach to block periodization involves the sequencing of three
different training blocks (Issurin 2008). The three different training blocks are
accumulation, transmutation, and realization. During each block of training, there
is a targeted physical characteristic to be improved. Those characteristics include
strength, power, endurance, agility, or speed to name a few.
During the accumulation phase, training volume is emphasized. As stated,
there is a specific focus on one aspect of fitness (e.g., power, speed, or endurance).
During transmutation, workload is decreased, allowing the body to adapt fully to
the stresses introduced during accumulation. Workouts become shorter and more
goal specific. During realization, workload is decreased even further, allowing
fitness adaptations to peak. The training intensities associated with these phases
are 50 to 75 percent for accumulation, 75 to 90 percent for transmutation, and
90 percent and higher for realization. The salient point to remember is intensity
starts low and volume starts high, progressing to high intensity to low volume.
Each block lasts about two to four weeks. Progressions from more repetitions at
lower weight to fewer repetitions at higher weight over two- to four-week blocks
are the most applicable to metabolic training (see table 4.1).
Table 4.1 Example of Block Periodization for Selected Exercises
Volume load
(Weight × sets ×
Weight Sets Repetitions repetitions)
Block 1: weeks 100 lb 3 12 3,600 lb
1-4
Block 2: weeks 105 lb 3 10 1,050 lb
5-8
Block 3: weeks 110 lb 3 8 880 lb
9-12
--- PAGE 37 ---
28 | Metabolic Training
Another concept of block periodization is training a physical characteristic
over a duration of time. For instance, a training block could last three months.
Each month, a different physical characteristic could be the focus. As an example,
the focus of month 1 is muscle endurance, the focus of month 2 is strength, and
the focus of month 3 is power. Sets, reps, and weights are adjusted to achieve a
desired effect. Block periodization modeling is flexible to accommodate changes
in training focus. However, there should be thought to the sequencing of blocks,
such as endurance followed by strength followed by power.
There is much more that could be said about the nuances of block periodiza-
tion—especially about its scientific foundations. Such discussions, however, would
exceed the scope of this book, which is focused on providing immediately appli-
cable concepts and programs.
Linear and Undulating Periodization
Linear periodization describes programs that progress in a straight, or nearly
straight, line. Exercise programming according to this model is characterized by
gradual increases in intensity and gradual decreases in volume.
Undulating periodization describes programs that rise and fall on a scheduled
timeframe—most often weekly. At its most fundamental, undulating periodiza-
tion involves scheduling high-repetition, low-volume days in close proximity to
low-repetition, high-volume days. (Of course, there are many different applied
models, but we will keep the fundamental variables of undulating periodization
simple.) For instance, when training twice a week, Monday’s exercises are per-
formed with three sets of 10 repetitions, and Thursday’s exercises are performed
for three sets of six repetitions. A corresponding increase in weight is used when
there is a decrease in repetitions.
Periodization’s Value to Metabolic Training
A central purpose of periodization is to avoid stagnation and maximize improve-
ment. Periodization is achieved through the manipulation of variables such as
frequency, intensity, and duration, among other loading parameters. There have
been a multitude of scientific studies validating the use of periodized training
models to improve performance and fitness (Bompa, 2009; Bondarchuk, 1988;
Bondarchuk, 1994; Foster, 1998; Stone, 1982; Stone, 2007).
Besides being a more effective method of training, periodization offers benefits
to the participant by way of
• Psychological mitigation. Varying training through sets, reps, and exercises
can offer a psychological or mental break.
• Goal setting. Periodization offers the participant the opportunity to set both
short-term and long-term goals. These goals can be set in accordance with
individual desires. Performance goals could be to improve endurance, add
muscle mass, or increase strength/power or O max. Health and fitness goals
2
could be to improve body composition, weight loss, blood profile, blood pres-
--- PAGE 38 ---
Periodization for Metabolic Training | 29
sure, or muscle strength and endurance, to name a few. Another goal could
be to consistently perform a number of workouts or consecutive workouts.
Regardless of what the goal is, it can be measured using the acronym SMART.
• Specific: Focus on one or two specific goals.
• Measurable: Use quantifiable metrics.
• Attainable: High but attainable goals are recommended.
• Realistic: Use reference points to help set realistic goals.
• Time sensitive: Have a timeline and monitor progress along the way.
Organizational Methods
There are several methods that can be used to implement periodization strate-
gies. Any one of these strategies can be effective; which strategy is most effec-
tive depends on the individual, with factors such as training history, response to
training, age, and others playing a determining role. In an effort to simplify and
possibly demystify the application of periodization, the following training model
is offered as a guide.
“Phases” of training simply refer to time periods. These time periods can be
short (lasting only one day) or quite long (lasting weeks or even months). There
are many reasons why you may want to stay in a particular training period. It is
essential for exercisers to change the phase of training, however, and the frequency,
intensity, type, and duration of training on a consistent basis (phases should gen-
erally not last longer than two to four weeks). Let’s further discuss some of the
most common phases of training and how they are characterized.
Hypertrophy Phase
The hypertrophy phase is performed with the intention of increasing muscle mass.
Traditionally, the hypertrophy phase is characterized by multiple sets, relatively
light weight, and high repetitions. For instance, if you wanted to increase the
muscle mass of your thighs, you would perform, squats, lunges, leg extensions,
and leg curls, completing three to four sets per exercise and anywhere from 8 to
12 repetitions per set. It should be noted that a one-size-fits-all approach is rarely
advisable when considering individual training strategies—a certain level of flex-
ibility is required to achieve optimal results.
Strength Phase
The goal of the strength phase is to increase the amount of force that a muscle or
action can produce. Linear periodization models often move immediately from a
hypertrophy phase to a strength phase. The strength phase utilizes lower repeti-
tions and heavier weights than the hypertrophy phase. Strength work, therefore, is
characterized by a higher level of intensity paired with lower volume. For example,
a strength workout might incorporate four sets of five to eight repetitions of squats.
--- PAGE 39 ---
30 | Metabolic Training
Power Phase Field and Clinical Tests
The goal of the power phase of training, which often follows the strength phase,
There is a difference between field tests and clinical tests. A field test is conducted in
is to improve the body’s ability to move weight quickly. Power is defined as work
the environment in which the activity is normally performed—a gym for weightlifting or a
(force times distance) divided by time. The faster you do the work, the higher the
track for running. For instance, using a pull-up bar in the gym for max reps is a field test
power output. During the power phase, your goal is to move the weight as fast as for upper body muscular endurance. Field tests are often more convenient than clinical
possible against gravity. While lowering the weight, focus on slow and controlled tests. A clinical test is performed in a laboratory, with the goal of maximizing accuracy
movements. With the power phase comes a further increase in intensity and a and precision. For instance, it may be desirable to measure three-dimensional peak
further reduction in volume. Using our example of the squat exercise, the loading power while performing a countermovement depth jump. This can be done using a force
parameters would be four sets of three to six repetitions. platform. Additionally, two independent platforms could be used to measure discrepan-
cies between the test subject’s legs. Clinical tests can be used to shed light on training
Competition Phase interventions and injury-prevention techniques.
The competition phase, which follows the power phase for competitive athletes,
represents, as the name suggests, the part of the season during which competition
takes place. Individuals who do not compete do not need to concern themselves
with this phase of training. This phase is characterized by the highest intensi-
ties and the lowest volumes. There is some variation in the ranges of weight and
repetitions used. Repetitions per set might range from three to five, and sets per
exercise might range from three to four. Typically, auxiliary exercises—such as
single-joint isolated movements (biceps and hamstring curls or triceps exten-
sions)—are eliminated during this phase.
Peaking Phase
The peaking phase is used to bring you to the absolute height of your abilities, and
it is incorporated into the competition phase. If you are performing metabolic-
training exercises for general health and fitness, there is little applicability to the
peaking phase. This phase is characterized by low volume and high intensity
and prioritizes sport-specific exercises. If you do decide to implement a peaking
phase, it will last for a short time.
Transition Phase
The transition phase is the last phase of training following a peaking or competition
phase. The purpose is to recover from a period of stressful training both mentally
and physically. Very light activities are used, and the emphasis is on low volume
and intensity. The transition phase lasts for one to two weeks.
Measurable Outcomes
Periodic assessment of fitness is advisable for various reasons. Assessment can
show improvement over time, can be measured against population norms, can
be used for goal setting, and can indicate the effectiveness of a training program.
There are a number of physical aspects that can be measured to aid in determin-
ing personal fitness goals. These include bodyweight, body fat, muscle endur-
ance, muscle strength or power, flexibility, agility, cardiorespiratory endurance
or capacity, speed, agility, and balance.
--- PAGE 40 ---
Periodization for Metabolic Training | 31
Power Phase Field and Clinical Tests
The goal of the power phase of training, which often follows the strength phase,
There is a difference between field tests and clinical tests. A field test is conducted in
is to improve the body’s ability to move weight quickly. Power is defined as work
the environment in which the activity is normally performed—a gym for weightlifting or a
(force times distance) divided by time. The faster you do the work, the higher the
track for running. For instance, using a pull-up bar in the gym for max reps is a field test
power output. During the power phase, your goal is to move the weight as fast as for upper body muscular endurance. Field tests are often more convenient than clinical
possible against gravity. While lowering the weight, focus on slow and controlled tests. A clinical test is performed in a laboratory, with the goal of maximizing accuracy
movements. With the power phase comes a further increase in intensity and a and precision. For instance, it may be desirable to measure three-dimensional peak
further reduction in volume. Using our example of the squat exercise, the loading power while performing a countermovement depth jump. This can be done using a force
parameters would be four sets of three to six repetitions. platform. Additionally, two independent platforms could be used to measure discrepan-
cies between the test subject’s legs. Clinical tests can be used to shed light on training
Competition Phase interventions and injury-prevention techniques.
The competition phase, which follows the power phase for competitive athletes,
represents, as the name suggests, the part of the season during which competition
It should be noted that in order to accurately measure fitness, tests must be both
takes place. Individuals who do not compete do not need to concern themselves
reliable and valid. Reliability refers to how consistent the test is. For instance,
with this phase of training. This phase is characterized by the highest intensi-
a reliable running test could be performed on a quarter-mile (400-meter) track,
ties and the lowest volumes. There is some variation in the ranges of weight and
under unchanged conditions (weather), at the same time of the day, and with an
repetitions used. Repetitions per set might range from three to five, and sets per
accurate timer. Validity describes the accuracy of the test—in other words, does
exercise might range from three to four. Typically, auxiliary exercises—such as
the test measure what it was designed to measure? A valid measure of sprint
single-joint isolated movements (biceps and hamstring curls or triceps exten-
speed, for instance, would be a 60-meter dash. An invalid measure of sprint speed
sions)—are eliminated during this phase.
would be a 10-kilometer race.
Peaking Phase As you determine and work toward your goals, you may want to assess yourself
at regular intervals. Be sure to conduct an assessment before you begin a new
The peaking phase is used to bring you to the absolute height of your abilities, and
training program so that you know where you’re starting from. The tests shown
it is incorporated into the competition phase. If you are performing metabolic-
in table 4.2 can be used to assess different areas of fitness and performance. You
training exercises for general health and fitness, there is little applicability to the
can find more information on assessing these areas in Jay Hoffman’s Norms for
peaking phase. This phase is characterized by low volume and high intensity
Fitness, Performance, and Health (Human Kinetics, 2006).
and prioritizes sport-specific exercises. If you do decide to implement a peaking
phase, it will last for a short time.
Table 4.2 Fitness and Performance Tests
Transition Phase Physical characteristics Tests
Muscular endurance Push-ups, pull-ups, bent-knee sit-ups, parallel bar dips,
The transition phase is the last phase of training following a peaking or competition
bench press for reps
phase. The purpose is to recover from a period of stressful training both mentally
Muscular strength Bench press (1 rep), squat (1 rep), chest press (1 rep),
and physically. Very light activities are used, and the emphasis is on low volume
leg press (1 rep)
and intensity. The transition phase lasts for one to two weeks.
Anaerobic power Wingate power test, standing long jump, vertical jump,
300-yard (274.3-meter) shuttle run
Measurable Outcomes
Aerobic power and endurance Maximal oxygen consumption tests, 1.5-mile
(2.4-kilometer) run for time, 12-minute run for distance
Periodic assessment of fitness is advisable for various reasons. Assessment can
show improvement over time, can be measured against population norms, can Body composition Comparing height and weight against population
norms, calculating body mass index, hydrostatic
be used for goal setting, and can indicate the effectiveness of a training program.
weighing, DEXA (dual X-ray absorptiometry), skinfold
There are a number of physical aspects that can be measured to aid in determin-
measurements
ing personal fitness goals. These include bodyweight, body fat, muscle endur-
Flexibility Sit-and-reach test, joint-angle measurement via
ance, muscle strength or power, flexibility, agility, cardiorespiratory endurance
goniometer
or capacity, speed, agility, and balance.
Speed and agility 40-yard (36.6-meter) dash, 30-yard (27.4-meter) dash,
pro agility test, T-test