--- PAGE 19 ---
Chapter 1
Meet the
Muscles
A basic understanding of how the musculature of the lower body works
and functions is paramount to effectively programming lower limb
exercises in a diverse and balanced way. A deeper understanding of the
basic anatomy will allow you to better analyze limitations and imbalances,
will help you avoid overuse injuries, and can help you design programs
that will expedite recovery after higher-threshold training sessions.
This chapter will cover the basics of primary and secondary movers—
the musculature that is responsible for driving human movement. Though
this text will not delve as deeply as an anatomy text, I want to provide the
“basics” so you are able to identify limitations while also understanding
better how to strategically target different muscle groups. For instance,
it’s not uncommon for hip shifts to present when maximal loads are used
with a movement such as a squat variation. Hip shifts are quite common
with bilateral movements such as the squat and occur when the hips shift
laterally during the concentric phase of the squat pattern. Although it’s
nearly impossible to eliminate all muscular imbalances, you can assume
that with bilateral training these imbalances will only be exacerbated.
Instead, we look to unilateral exercises to provide the basis for improving
current limitations. As a result, the level of hip shift that may present with
maximal loads in the squat can be decreased, but more importantly, the
level of strength in agonist and antagonist muscle groups can be improved,
which directly correlates to improving muscle size.
QUADRICEPS
Since the quadriceps are located at the front of the body, this compels
many people to dedicate a fair amount of time to their development,
just as people often prioritize their chest training over their upper
3
--- PAGE 20 ---
4 Lower Body Training
back. While there are benefits to having strong and massive quadriceps,
from a health and longevity standpoint, development of the posterior
musculature presents many benefits over spending your time focusing
solely on the quadriceps. (We’ll spend a fair amount of time developing
the reasoning behind this later in chapter 6 when hip-dominant exercises
are discussed.) However, understanding the anatomical makeup of the
quadriceps is important so you can accurately assess which aspects of
your quadriceps will need the most attention; this will allow you to make
better decisions with regard to exercise selection.
The quadriceps femoris, located in the anterior (extensor) compartment
of the thigh, is made up of four parts—rectus femoris, vastus lateralis,
vastus medialis, and vastus intermedius (see figure 1.1). The quadriceps
muscle covers the majority of the anterior surface and the sides of the
thigh. The rectus femoris, the only part of the quadriceps that crosses
the hip joint and therefore plays a role in both knee and hip flexion, is
located in the middle of the anterior compartment of the thigh. The
rectus femoris is superficial, covering the vastus intermedius. In addition,
the rectus femoris also covers the superior-medial portion of both the
vastus lateralis and vastus medialis. In Latin, the word rectus means
“straight,” and the rectus femoris is named for its anatomical position:
running straight down the center of the anterior compartment of the
thigh. It originates from the anterior
inferior iliac spine and from the superior
edge of the acetabulum.
The three vastus portions of the
quadriceps lie deep under the rectus
femoris, originate from the body of the
femur, and span the trochanters to the
condyles. The vastus lateralis, located on
the lateral (outer) portion of the thigh,
away from the midline of the body,
originates from the greater trochanter
Vastus and linea aspera of the femur. The
intermedius
vastus medialis, located on the medial
(beneath the
rectus femoris) (inner) portion of the thigh, closest to
the midline of the body, originates from
Rectus femoris
the linea aspera of the femur. Lastly, the
vastus intermedius is located deep to
Vastus lateralis Vastus the rectus femoris muscle, between the
medialis
vastus medialis and vastus lateralis, and
originates from the anterior and lateral
surfaces of the femur. The four parts of
Figure 1.1 The quadriceps muscles. the quadriceps merge together at their
E8335/Brown/F01.01/678300/mh-R1
--- PAGE 21 ---
Meet the Muscles 5
distal ends to form the quadriceps tendon at the patella and attach to
the tibial tuberosity via the patellar ligament.
All four quadriceps muscle parts are innervated by the femoral
nerve and are responsible for extending the leg at the knee joint. Only
the rectus femoris plays an additional role in flexing the thigh at the
hip joint. The collective action of the quadriceps muscle parts makes
them all important knee extensors and therefore paramount in daily
activities such as walking, running, jumping, cycling, and even squatting
and lunging. The additional role of the rectus femoris—assisting the
iliopsoas in hip flexion—is important not only for performance but also
for everyday activities. The rectus femoris is active during two distinct
phases of the gait (walking) cycle. In the first phase the rectus femoris
is important during the loading phase when all four muscle parts act
eccentrically at the knee during load-bearing activities such as walking
or running. During the swing phase of the walking or running cycle,
the rectus femoris plays a key role, acting as a hip flexor to propel the
trailing leg forward into the swing phase for the following step. During
activities such as walking, all four quadriceps parts (as well as ligaments
and tendons) are responsible for stabilizing the patella and keeping it in
place. If the patella moves out of place during activities such as walking,
it is commonly referred to as patella tracking disorder. This can occur
by either lateral or medial displacement of the patella.
When we’re considering direct training of the quadriceps, it is
important to know that the quads will respond well to many rep ranges
and frequencies of training because their muscle fiber makeup is mixed.
Certain areas of the quadriceps, such as the vastus intermedius, are
composed of more fast-twitch muscle fiber. This makes the case that in
order to effectively train the quadriceps, one should use rep ranges that
satisfy multiple special strengths, such as submaximal strength ranges of
three- to six-rep max, traditional hypertrophy ranges of 6- to 12-rep max,
and a strength endurance range of 15 or more repetitions. Common staple
exercises to train the quadriceps are lunge and split squat variations,
as well as bigger bilateral movements like the front squat or Anderson
squat variations, which will be highlighted in chapter 5.
Understanding the function and anatomy of the quadriceps is a great
place to start for program design and for those who may be lacking
strength or symmetry (or both) in the quadriceps. This will allow you
to make progressive improvements to your quadriceps in a 12- to 16-
week time frame. Furthermore, having a grasp on optimal programming
specific to quadriceps is important not only for aesthetics but for everyday
function because quadriceps strength can be directly linked to knee
health. (Knee injury is common with endurance activities such as jogging
that many use as their primary means of training.)
--- PAGE 22 ---
6 Lower Body Training
HAMSTRINGS
The three muscles of the posterior (flexor) compartment of the thigh,
known as the hamstrings, are the semitendinosus, semimembranosus,
and biceps femoris (see figure 1.2). The hamstrings get their name
because their elongated tendons are stringlike. The three hamstring
muscles play an important role in the actions of hip extension and knee
flexion. The biceps femoris is a unique muscle of the hamstring group
because it has two heads (long and short). The long and short head of the
biceps femoris have different sites of origin but do have the same insertion
point. The long head of the biceps femoris is more superficial compared
to the short head; if you looked at the muscles from a posterior view, the
short head would be mostly blocked from view. The short head of the
biceps femoris originates at the linea aspera of the femur (lower down
the leg than other hamstring muscles). For this reason, it is sometimes
not included as part of the hamstring group since originating at the
ischial tuberosity is considered a defining characteristic of the hamstring
group. Furthermore, due to its site of origin, the short head of the biceps
femoris only crosses the knee joint and therefore plays a role only in knee
flexion and not in hip extension. It is important to note that the short
head of the biceps femoris can be completely absent in some individuals.
The hamstrings flex the knee joint and extend the thigh to the back
side of the body. They are used in walking, sprinting, and many other
movements. All the hamstring muscles, with the exception of the short
head of the biceps femoris, have their origin
(where their tendons attach to bone) at the
ischial tuberosity of the hip. As previously
mentioned, the short head of the biceps
femoris actually originates further down the
leg, on the linea aspera of the femur. The most
medial muscle, the semimembranosus,
inserts on the medial condyle of the tibia
bone. The semitendinosus inserts on the
superior part of the medial tibia. The most
lateral hamstring, the biceps femoris, inserts
Biceps on the lateral side of the fibula and attaches
femoris
(short head) to the superior part of the lateral tibia. An
Biceps important anatomical landmark is located in
femoris the posterior portion of the knee and is called
(long head)
Semimembranosus cut and the popliteal fossa. This landmark is a
removed
Semitendinosus diamond-shaped space formed by the
tendons of the biceps femoris muscle, which
Figure 1.2 The hamstring
muscles. create the lateral border, and the tendons of
E8335/Brown/F01.02/678301/mh-R1
--- PAGE 23 ---
Meet the Muscles 7
the semimembranosus and semitendinosus, which create the medial
border. Lastly, the semitendinosus, semimembranosus, and the long head
of the biceps femoris are all innervated by the tibial branch of the sciatic
nerve, whereas the short head of the biceps femoris is innervated by the
common fibular branch of the sciatic nerve.
The hamstrings play a crucial role in many daily activities such as
walking, running, and jumping and in controlling some movement in
the glutes. The muscles that make up the hamstrings are known as
biarticular muscles because they cross and influence movement at
two joints: the hip and the knee joints. Biarticular muscles are typically
found in the upper and lower extremities. Let’s briefly look at the actions
of each hamstring muscle. First, the long head and short head of the
biceps femoris have similar but slightly different actions. The long head
is responsible for flexion of the knee, extension of the hip, and lateral
rotation of the lower leg, and it can also assist in lateral rotation of the
thigh when the hip is extended. On the other hand, the short head of the
biceps femoris (which has a different origin than all the other hamstring
muscles) is responsible for flexion of the knee as well as lateral rotation
of the lower leg when the knee is slightly flexed. The main actions of
the semitendinosus muscle (which receives its name due to having a
long tendon of insertion) are knee flexion, hip extension, and medial
rotation of the lower leg when the knee is flexed. The semitendinosus
also plays a small role in medial rotation of the thigh at the hip joint.
Another important anatomical landmark worth mentioning is the pes
anserinus, which means “goose foot” in Latin—it’s a name that reflects
its resemblance to the foot of a goose. The pes anserinus, a common
area of pain and inflammation, is formed by the attachment of three
muscles in the same location (semitendinosus, sartorius, and gracilis)
proximally on the medial side of the tibia and superficial to the medial
collateral ligament (MCL) of the knee. Lastly, the primary actions of the
semimembranosus are knee flexion, hip extension, and medial rotation
of the thigh and lower leg.
The hamstrings play an important role during the different phases
of walking or running. As mentioned previously, the hamstrings are
primarily involved in hip extension and knee flexion. During walking or
running, the hamstrings also play a key role in eccentrically slowing down
both hip flexion and knee extension before the heel strikes the ground.
The hamstrings are composed of a high degree of fast-twitch muscle
fiber, which will vary based on the genetic makeup of the individual. To
develop the fast-twitch muscle fiber of the hamstrings, I recommend
training with heavier loads in the three- to six-rep max range. The
hamstrings also respond favorably to true maximal strength work with
singular effort one-rep maxes. Training the hamstrings in submaximal
--- PAGE 24 ---
8 Lower Body Training
strength settings is not common, though, and many stick to standard
hypertrophy schemes in the 8- to 15-rep range, which is a mistake.
Common exercise variations to optimally train the hamstrings are RDL
variations, rack pull deadlift variations, and glute-ham raise variations.
CALVES
The group of seven muscles in the posterior compartment of the lower
leg is commonly referred to as the calves. This group can be further
subdivided into three superficial muscles and four deep muscles. The
gastrocnemius and soleus are the two most dominant muscles and make
up the shape of the calves (see figure 1.3). Both are superficial muscles
and are heavily involved in plantar flexion (pointing the foot downward).
The gastrocnemius is the most superficial and is most prominent in
forming the shape of the posterior compartment of the lower leg. The
gastrocnemius has two heads that originate from the left and right
femoral condyle, respectively, and merge together to form a single muscle
belly that runs down the whole posterior of the lower leg. It combines
with the soleus to form the calcaneal (Achilles) tendon, which inserts
on the calcaneus (heel bone).
The broad and flat soleus muscle is
located beneath the gastrocnemius and
gets its name from its resemblance to
a sole, which is a flat fish. The soleus
originates at the head of the fibula and
medial border of the tibia. Similar to the
gastrocnemius, the soleus also inserts on
the calcaneus via the calcaneal tendon.
Both the gastrocnemius and the soleus
Plantaris
are important in plantar flexion and
are innervated by the tibial nerve. The
Gastrocnemius Gastrocnemius
(medial head) (lateral head) gastrocnemius and soleus are commonly
grouped together and referred to by
anatomists as the triceps surae.
Soleus
The calves can be isolated by
performing movements involving plantar
flexion (pointing the toes down). The
two major categories of calf exercises are
those that maintain an extended knee
and those that maintain a flexed knee.
The first category includes movements
such as standing calf raises and the
Figure 1.3 The calf muscles. second category includes movements
E8335/Brown/F01.03/678302/mh-R1
--- PAGE 25 ---
Meet the Muscles 9
such as seated calf raises. Movements with a straight knee (such as the
standing calf raise) will target the gastrocnemius muscle more, and
movements with a bent knee (such as the seated calf raise) will target
the soleus muscle more. However, both variations will target both muscles
to a large degree.
It is worth mentioning that both the gastrocnemius and soleus play an
important role in the skeletal-muscle pump. The term skeletal-muscle
pump refers to certain muscles’ ability to aid in the circulation of blood
through the cardiovascular system. When someone is standing, gravity
tends to pull blood to the periphery of the body (in this case, the lower
leg). When someone is upright but moving, the gastrocnemius and soleus
contract to help push blood back to the heart. The movement of blood
back to the heart is called venous return. The calf muscles help push
blood back to the heart and therefore aid in the heart’s ability to effectively
pump blood throughout the remainder of the body.
Because the calf muscles are composed predominantly of slow-
twitch muscle fiber, they respond well to high-frequency training and
higher-volume sets of 15 or more repetitions. The calves also use the
stretch-shortening cycle. The stretch-shortening cycle is what allows
for an increase in force and power production if a rapid eccentric
countermovement is immediately followed by an explosive concentric
movement. Think of a vertical jump in which there is a rapid eccentric
countermovement; elastic energy is stored within the tendon and can be
immediately released if a quick concentric muscle action follows, thus
increasing force and power for a higher jump. In other words, the calves
have the potential to use the energy created through the eccentric phase
of the exercise variation (e.g., a calf raise) to their advantage. Because of
this, to achieve full benefits when training the calves, it is best to pause
between repetitions to allow the calves to bear the brunt of the work.
Common calf exercises include seated calf raises, single-leg dumbbell calf
raises, and standing calf raises with a barbell in the back rack position
(placed on the mid traps as is done for a high-bar back squat).
GLUTE COMPLEX
The glute complex, located posteriorly to the pelvic girdle at the proximal
end of the femur, is made up of three muscles—the gluteus maximus,
the gluteus medius, and the gluteus minimus (see figure 1.4). The glute
complex plays an important role in movements such as walking, running,
jumping, and many other athletic tasks. Originating at the iliac crest,
sacrum, and coccyx, the gluteus maximus spans the buttocks at about
a 45-degree angle and inserts into the iliotibial tract and the gluteal
tuberosity just below the greater trochanter of the femur. The gluteus
--- PAGE 26 ---
10 Lower Body Training
Gluteus Gluteus maximus, the predominant
medius (cut) medius muscle in forming the shape of
the buttocks, is not only the
Gluteus largest of the three gluteal
maximus (cut)
muscles but also one of the
Gluteus largest muscles in the body
minimus
overall. As the most superficial
of all three glute complex
Gluteus muscles, the gluteus maximus is
maximus
the primary extensor of the hip,
Figure 1.4 The gluteal muscles. pulling the pelvis backward, in
addition to its role in lateral
rotEa8t3i3o5n/B roofw nt/hFe01 .t0h4/i6g7h83.0 T3/hmeh- Rq1uadrilateral-shaped gluteus maximus covers
the other two muscles of the glute complex except for a small portion of
the gluteus medius—a spot that is a common site for intramuscular
injections. The gluteus medius is a fan-shaped muscle located between
the gluteus maximus and gluteus minimus and is responsible for
abduction and medial rotation of the leg. Both the gluteus medius and
the gluteus minimus originate on the ilium of the hip bone and insert at
the greater trochanter of the femur. Finally, the gluteus minimus is the
smallest and deepest of the glute complex muscles and, like the gluteus
medius, is responsible for abduction and medial rotation of the leg. The
gluteus maximus is innervated by the inferior gluteal nerve, whereas
both the gluteus medius and gluteus minimus are innervated by the
superior gluteal nerve.
The functions of the glutes include extension and abduction, and they
also perform internal and external rotation of the hip joint. The gluteus
maximus supports the extended knee. The glutes respond to a high
amount of slow-twitch fiber muscle like the calves, making the optimal
schemes for training them in the higher ranges (10 or more repetitions).
Staple exercises to train the glutes include the barbell glute bridge, barbell
glute hip thrust, and 45-degree back raise.
Functional anatomy as it relates to lower body training is complex, to
say the least, but this basic information will allow your programming for
lower body–specific training days to be more targeted and thus optimized
in terms of delivery, execution, and long-term effectiveness. While it may
seem that pulling together a list of solid lower body exercises discussed in
this book is simple enough, I’d urge you to first consider your individual
goals, where you’re most limited with regard to lower limb development,
and how you can reach your goals while simultaneously achieving health
and longevity.
--- PAGE 27 ---
Chapter 2
Create Better
Balance Through
Movement
It’s no secret that we are living in a society plagued by chronic conditions
such as lower back disorders, generalized front-sided shoulder pain, and
obesity. For many, lower back pain occurs through no fault of their own.
The daily postures of most—that is, sitting in flexion, internal rotation,
and adduction—present many issues for people that only exacerbate
their current issues. Lower back disorders are more connected to these
daily postures than most would suspect. In fact, one study found that
gluteus medius weakness and gluteal muscle tenderness are common
symptoms in people with chronic nonspecific lower back pain (Cooper
et al. 2016). Although this finding is not particularly surprising to most
fitness professionals (I’ve seen it for the past decade), it gives these
professionals the unique opportunity to profoundly affect their clients’
health and wellness through strength training, particularly training that
focuses on the proper use of quad- versus hip-dominant movements as
well as hip adduction and abduction.
UNDERSTANDING THE BILATERAL VERSUS
UNILATERAL TRAINING DEBATE
In strength and conditioning circles, it is common knowledge that one
needs to have a balance between bilateral movements (e.g., multijoint
movements like squats and deadlifts) and unilateral movements (e.g.,
single-joint movements like lunges). There is no debate there, but a
11
--- PAGE 28 ---
12 Lower Body Training
commonly asked question is how much of each should make up one’s
training program. First, let’s try to understand the consequences of
taking on only one of these forms as stand-alone training, or engaging
in a program that neglects unilateral movements and focuses more on
their bilateral counterparts. This is a common theme in many training
programs today such as CrossFit or Olympic weightlifting. If the
programming of bilateral movements such as squats and deadlifts makes
up the bulk of your training, there certainly could be positive adaptations
made, but the question is, for how long would these positive adaptations
occur? For most people in this situation, which is common in functional
fitness communities, there will be setbacks due to phenomena such as
bilateral asymmetries and bilateral deficits.
First off, a bilateral asymmetry is a discrepancy in strength between
right and left limbs. Of course, no two limbs are created perfectly equal,
so this makes sense, but too high of doses of bilateral movements will
exacerbate these discrepancies instead of remedying them. A bilateral
deficit occurs when there are asymmetries in force production between
unilateral and bilateral movements (Haff 2016). An easy example of this
would be performing a one-rep max of a split squat variation, taking the
sum of both legs, and comparing that to a bilateral max, such as for a
back squat. While this may not be a reliable test for everyone and involves
high levels of motor control, the point is that trained athletes want to see
some semblance of balance between the right and left limbs. However,
please note that while many well-established coaches have used this
test as a marker of lower body strength symmetry, the reliability of this
test may not be consistent with real-world data. It is possible to have
an athlete test poorly for unilateral strength yet exhibit high levels of
bilateral strength.
At Westside Barbell (WSBB), considered the “strongest gym in the
world,” they follow the 80/20 rule—80 percent of their training volume
is made up of “special exercises”—assistance exercises performed with
dumbbells and unilateral movements—while the other 20 percent comes
from the classic bilateral lifts and their variations (Simmons 2015). You
may be thinking, “How is this the strongest gym in the world when it comes
to the squat, bench press, and deadlift considering they only perform
these variations 20 percent of the time?” The answer is resoundingly
simple—“We use special exercises to build lean-muscle mass, improve
imbalances and lagging muscle-groups, and improve upon our weakest
links—we are only as strong as our weakest link” (Simmons 2015). Of
course, the athletes who train at WSBB are always technicians when it
comes to squatting, pressing, and pulling, so spending the bulk of their
time building where they are weak makes sense, but assistance work is
--- PAGE 29 ---
Create Better Balance Through Movement 13
still vitally important for the average person while building component
motor patterns with the squat and hinge patterns.
Furthermore, given the physiology of unilateral movements, it makes
sense that we are able to better address limitations and imbalances
with them since we are able to train our lower body in isolation with
less contribution of opposing limbs (most times). Lastly, an important
consideration is the central nervous system (CNS) fatigue that is created
by performing multijoint movements. For instance, if I asked a client to
squat and deadlift for their entire 60-minute training session, not only
would this create tissue damage, but the CNS fatigue could take up to
96 hours to fully recover from. If you do not consider these aspects of
training and only train with movements that result in high levels of CNS
fatigue, your risk of overtraining will be higher. Conversely, if the dose
of multijoint movements is commensurate with the dose of single-joint
assistance exercises within the same session, the demand on the CNS
will be reduced, thus allowing for better recovery between sessions of
both the CNS and the peripheral nervous system.
It’s commonplace to see higher-level athletes pushing their squat and
pulling volume and neglecting the less “sexy” components of training
such as single-joint exercises. This yields a greater chance of creating
compensatory motor patterns that could result in an overuse injury and—
because bilateral movements apply more stress to the CNS—higher levels
of fatigue. The fatigue may manifest with lesser-known symptoms such as
loss of motivation (French 2016). In other words, higher doses of bilateral
movements present many challenges to the CNS and the musculoskeletal
system. Practitioners who prescribe high doses of bilateral movements
frequently are increasing the risk of overtraining among their clients, so
a balance between bilateral and unilateral work must be achieved, with
the latter being prescribed in higher doses than the former to prevent
deleterious effects and to create symmetry in the lower body. This will
also increase the chances of creating synergistic training effects by way
of keeping stress in check.
In short, the balance between bilateral and unilateral movements
is paramount to your success. It’s important to understand that you
can push the volume of unilateral exercises more than you can for
bilateral exercises since the demand on the CNS and the likelihood of
ingraining compensation patterns are lower. With that said, the increase
in anabolic hormones from bilateral movements is greater than from
single-joint exercises, so you would not want to completely disregard
bilateral movements. The key takeaway is applying balance relative
to the individual. As noted, WSBB athletes are masters of the squat
and pull and need more specificity to bring up lagging muscle groups,
--- PAGE 30 ---
14 Lower Body Training
whereas beginners may still need to devote time to simply developing the
motor pattern of their squat and pull. Because the nuances of individual
programming can differ so much from individual to individual, everyone
requires an individualized approach to effective training long term.
ACHIEVING BALANCE THROUGH PROPER
MOVEMENT PATTERNS
It makes sense to devote a significant amount of time to strength training
the regions of the posterior chain such as the glutes, hamstrings, and
spinal erectors when they are underdeveloped (or, for many, simply not
functioning properly), even if you don’t suffer from lower back pain.
This effectively counters many of these issues by bringing people into
more extension, external rotation, and abduction movements, and it
provides a small countermeasure of relief from everyday postures
many find themselves in for hours on end. (A staggering portion of the
population spends the majority of their lives sitting in flexion-based
postures.)
You will notice that this book spends a great deal of time systematically
training the musculature of the posterior regions of the body. This
is because daily postures of most people not only present structural
problems but also create lack of strength in this key musculature, which
allows compensation and faulty motor patterns to be ingrained and causes
an overreliance on vulnerable areas of the body in everyday movement.
For example, due to a lack of ability to load the hamstrings when picking
up an object (as a result of weak hamstrings and poor motor control),
that load is then relegated to the lumbar spine, or lower back, with little
contribution from the glutes and hamstrings. Picking up an object without
loading the hamstrings is akin to teaching a client to deadlift without
learning the hip hinge pattern (with proper lumbopelvic rhythm) first.
Together, a better awareness of lumbopelvic rhythm (motor control), the
ability to articulate the hips in a manner that maintains a neutral spine
when picking up an object, and the ability to effectively use the hips to
create a hinge pattern and lock the lumbar spine into a static and stable
position allow better usage of the glutes and hamstrings as prime movers
instead of stabilizers.
In other words, posterior chain development, particularly of the glute
complex and hamstrings, is a critical component of effective lower body
training for health, longevity, performance, and athletics. While we
know that the posterior plays a major role in overall success (whether
in terms of health or performance), this isn’t to say that you should
neglect training the anterior region of the body; quite the contrary.
--- PAGE 31 ---
Create Better Balance Through Movement 15
Instead, you should have an optimal balance of posterior versus anterior
chain training and choose exercises that fit individual goals, needs, and
anthropometrics (limb length), as well as consistently allow for motor
pattern improvement. (The execution of the hip hinge pattern needs
consistent attention because becoming complacent may put you at risk
of injury.)
While quad-dominant exercises are important and will certainly be
covered in great depth, understanding how strength in the posterior
regions of the body that support both local motion and the hip hinge
pattern plays a key role in lower back integrity is important for any
strength and conditioning professional. A baseline level of knowledge
with regard to hip- and quad-dominant and abduction- and adduction-
dominant movements is the starting point to create more balance
through movement and to strategically include specific movements in
your program design. This will give you the ability to do the following:
• Assess limitations. Since the human body is not completely
symmetrical, neither is the ratio of strength between limbs. The
ability to identify areas of opportunity for training focus and to
select exercises based on those limitations is important for health
and strength improvement. For instance, if an individual has a one-
rep max front squat that is close to their one-rep max deadlift, that
individual is limited in terms of posterior chain recruitment and
maximal strength. Programming variations can then be included
that address limitations of the musculature that drives hip extension
and hip abduction, which will balance out the ratio of strength
between the posterior and anterior chains of the individual.
• Create balance within program design specific to need. Using
the same example, offsetting the distribution of hip-dominant versus
quad-dominant work in favor of the former will be important.
• Address limitations related to job descriptions. If we know an
individual works a desk job and is sitting for extended periods, it
will make sense to counter these anatomical positions (i.e., more
hip-dominant patterns). The overwhelming majority of individuals
will present common posture maladies. We counter these maladies
with movements that pull people into healthier postures.
Table 2.1 provides examples of what quad-dominant, hip-dominant,
hip adduction, and hip abduction movement patterns look like in terms
of exercise selection to give you a better understanding of what these
terms mean and how they could play out within a training program.
--- PAGE 32 ---
16 Lower Body Training
Table 2.1 Movement Pattern Examples
Quad-
Hip-dominant dominant Hip abduction Hip adduction
Sumo stance Front squat Landmine Adduction
deadlift lateral squat machine
Goblet squat
Barbell Abduction Banded
Dumbbell
Romanian machine adduction
forward lunge
deadlift
X-band walk Side-lying
Air squat
Trap bar adduction
Fire hydrant
Romanian
Standing hip
deadlift
adduction with
Glute bridge a band
PRIORITIZING HIP- VERSUS QUAD-
DOMINANT MOVEMENT PATTERNS
It’s fairly well established in the strength training community that
training the musculature of the glute complex and hamstrings provides
a noteworthy return on investment in terms of health (in particular
lower back health), longevity, and performance. The question is, how
do we distribute movements within a training program to prioritize
hip-dominant patterns over quad-dominant patterns? While you can
find studies on the connection between glute strength and reduction
of lower back pain, throwing out a blanket number for optimal ratio of
hip- versus quad-dominant patterns would disregard bioindividuality.
However, anecdotally speaking, a large majority of clients with whom I
work have incurred great success when we favor the posterior chain in
our exercise selection. So what does this mean, exactly?
I have found that a ratio of 2:1 hip-dominant versus quad-dominant
exercises can have a profound effect on individuals who have desk
jobs or sit for the majority of the day. Moreover, as the incidence of
lower back disorders rises, we know that strengthening the supporting
musculature of the glutes and hamstrings can help create awareness
of lumbopelvic rhythm, and using hinging patterns in the gym and in
everyday life can reduce undue stress on the lumbar spine. These facts
point toward prioritizing more hip-dominant patterns, but of course
one size never fits all, and optimal ratios should be determined on a
case-by-case basis.
--- PAGE 33 ---
Create Better Balance Through Movement 17
Table 2.2 Sample Training Sessions With 2:1 Hip- Versus Quad-
Dominant Ratio
Exercise Sets Reps Rest
Training session 1
Box squat 5 5 120 sec
Trap bar Romanian deadlift 4 8-10 90 sec
Goblet squat 3 12-15 60 sec
Back raise 3 30 60 sec
Training session 2
Sumo stance rack deadlift Build in weight 1RM 180 sec
over 9 sets
Glute-ham raise 4 8-10 90 sec
Dumbbell reverse lunge 3 8-10 each side 60 sec
Cable pull-through 4 15 60 sec
As an example of this 2:1 ratio, table 2.2 shows two sample training
sessions for the lower body that focus more on hip-dominant patterns
but still include work for the anterior chain and quadriceps development.
One of the more difficult aspects of achieving this 2:1 ratio is selecting
exercises that match your goals. People often get “paralysis by analysis”
from the sheer number of exercise variations at their disposal; however,
this book is intended to help you zero in on tried-and-true exercises to
allow you to arrive at your desired result of performance and longevity.
With that said, knowing how to make substitutions based on what you
have at your disposal is important. If you don’t have access to a full
commercial gym or complex equipment, the simplicity of dumbbells,
a landmine, and bands can provide positive training effects. Table 2.3
provides some exercise examples. The number of options is virtually
unlimited, even with minimal equipment.
--- PAGE 34 ---
18 Lower Body Training
Table 2.3 Options for Bilateral and Unilateral Hip- and Quad-
Dominant Exercises Using Simple Equipment
Quad-dominant exercise options Hip-dominant exercise options
Bilateral Unilateral Bilateral Unilateral
Front squat Forward lunge Trap bar Barbell single-
Romanian leg Romanian
1-1/4 front squat Barbell front
deadlift deadlift
rack reverse
Anderson front
lunge Sumo deadlift Single-leg back
squat
raise
Dumbbell split Rack deadlift
Front squat to
squat Single-leg glute
pins Glute hip thrust
hip thrust
Box step-up
Front box squat Reverse band
Single-leg
Walking lunge Romanian
Air squat Romanian
deadlift
Dumbbell Goblet reverse deadlift
lunge Banded pull-
goblet squat Dumbbell
through
Goblet box Dumbbell single-leg
squat reverse lunge Dumbbell Romanian
Landmine Romanian deadlift
Double deadlift
kettlebell box lateral squat Single-leg
squat Glute bridge banded
Double-leg hamstring curl
Banded air
squat banded Single-leg
hamstring curl landmine
Romanian
deadlift
While the list of exercise variations for the lower body is extensive, a
better option is focusing on the route of each movement pattern first—
this promotes better movement competency and allows motor patterns
to be ingrained before you attempt any of these movement progressions.
The beauty of these movement patterns is that they do not require any
specialized equipment; significant progress can be made with basic items.
For beginner and novice individuals, movement competency is paramount
to achieving long-lasting results and, most importantly, longevity in
the resistance training game. In fact, it is the successful foundation to
build upon with load and exercise variations that are higher up on the
movement hierarchy pyramid.
--- PAGE 35 ---
Chapter 3
Go Beyond
the Basics
It’s no secret that training big core lifts like the front squat and sumo
stance deadlift will produce delayed training effects; more importantly,
because the range of motion (ROM) is significant with these lifts, the
hormonal response in the body is also significant. We are going to
address hormonal response and cover a variety of strength training
methods, including the repeated effort method, the maximal effort (ME)
method, the submaximal effort method, and the dynamic effort (DE)
method, as well as general physical preparedness (GPP) work. You will
see throughout this book that being aware of the adaptations that take
place from each method, the demand on the nervous system from each
method, and the overall goal for each method is critical to designing
effective training programs that are balanced and thorough.
It’s common for individuals to attempt the “next best thing” instead of
adhering to tried-and-true methods that have been around for decades.
It’s also important to note that not all methods have the same intent and
each method has a specific place and desired stimulus—you will notice
how synergy can be created by using opposing methods. The benefits
of blending opposing methods are twofold: (1) variability in bar velocity
(bar speed), which utilizes both the force and velocity components of the
force-velocity curve to create different training effects and neurological
adaptations (Haff and Bompa 2009); and (2) the ability to prevent
overtraining. Favoring one method over others presents challenges in
terms of motor recruitment and, more importantly, risks overuse injuries
and overtraining (e.g., performing ME training too often only utilizes
the force component of strength training and does not present differing
demands on the CNS). In short, each method described will serve a
specific and unique purpose for you, and while not all methods need to
19
--- PAGE 36 ---
20 Lower Body Training
The Force-Velocity Curve
When different strength development methods are used, there
is more potential for altering the force-velocity curve. The force-
velocity curve examines the
interactions between force and
velocity and suggests there is
an inverse relationship: when
external resistance increases,
movement velocity decreases
(maximal effort work); and
when external resistance
decreases, movement velocity
increases (Haff and Bompa
2009). See figure for an
Velocity
example of the force-velocity
curve.
E8335/Brown/F10.01/678853/mh-R3
be used simultaneously, you will learn how to balance your plan of attack
by working both ends of the force-velocity curve.
HORMONAL RESPONSES OF STRENGTH
TRAINING
The benefits of effective lower limb training extend to optimal hormone
production because the lower body represents the largest muscle groups
in the body that signal the growth hormone insulin-like growth factor 1
(IGF-1) and serum testosterone. It’s been widely established that long-
term heavy resistance training can bring about significant increases of
muscle size, strength, and power. These increases can boost hormonal
interactions, and the type of exercise is a major player in how big the
hormonal response is. Because heavy compound movements like squats
and deadlifts require high levels of motor-unit recruitment, they activate
androgen receptors for anabolic hormones such as testosterone. The
inflammatory response to skeletal muscle damage causes remodeling to
take place and consequently new growth to occur. Moreover, long-term
training effects from heavy lower body resistance exercises can result
in adaptations in the endocrine system, thus creating an environment
in the human body that is suited for transport of anabolic hormones.
ecroF
Maximal strength
Strength speed
Power
Speed strength
Speed
Force-velocity curve.
--- PAGE 37 ---
Go Beyond the Basics 21
Therefore, heavy resistance training is a requisite for creating an anabolic
environment in the human body that is more capable of gaining lean
tissue; and gains in lean tissue are closely related to gains in maximal
strength because cell size and volume are synonymous with improved
motor-unit recruitment (Kraemer, Vingren, and Spiering 2016).
While you don’t need to be an exercise physiologist to understand
the positive effect strength training produces with regard to anabolic
(muscle-building) hormones, it is important to have a baseline level of
knowledge about the training effects of lower body training. It seems
logical that the largest muscles in the human body are going to facilitate
spikes in hormones that involve building strength and muscle mass.
There are a couple things to consider in addition to the roles of IGF-1,
growth hormone, testosterone, and insulin. The first thing is your training
age or the total amount of time you’ve spent performing resistance training
because this can dictate improvements that take place from a neural
standpoint; there is more to the picture than just hormonal response. For
instance, it is common for beginners just starting strength training to see
improvement in strength before seeing large gains in muscle hypertrophy.
Beginner-level individuals may add 40 to 50 pounds (18 to 23 kg) to their
squat and deadlift in as little as 16 weeks owing to neural adaptations that
take place upon initial exposure to strength training.
Over the course of your first 8 to 12 weeks of a strength training
program, you typically see a much faster rate of strength improvement
due to direct factors relating to the nervous system, such as:
• Increased neural drive
• Increased neural coordination
• Increased motor-unit synchronization
These physiological changes (among many others) allow a beginner to
recruit more high-threshold motor units, leading to an increase in type
II muscle fiber activation. Not only can an individual recruit more high-
threshold motor units, but the firing rate (rate coding) may also become
more synchronous with other high-threshold motor units, which will affect
the onset of discharge and therefore improve the rate of force development
(RFD). This increase in RFD means an athlete requires a shorter time to
reach maximal force (this helps translate to explosive movements). After
the initial 8 to 12 weeks, increase in muscle hypertrophy becomes a more
important factor, further increasing maximal strength (Schoenfeld 2021).
In short, while strength training has positive effects on anabolic hormone
production, this is only one piece of the puzzle; it is important to understand
that this process is multifaceted and very much dictated by your overall
training experience (or lack of experience).
--- PAGE 38 ---
22 Lower Body Training
STRENGTH TRAINING AND ITS RELATION
TO OTHER BIOMOTOR ABILITIES
Before we delve into the various methods of strength development, it is
important to understand what strength is. Although one can read about
strength in just about any exercise physiology book, let’s review a few
key definitions first and see how and why strength is relevant to your
training program. It’s important to note that strength provides the basis
for success across multiple modalities, as well as increased resiliency
and longevity; and it connects to every biomotor ability (see figure 3.1).
There is no question that strength is the ultimate biomotor ability and
carries over to improvements in other important fitness characteristics
such as speed, power, and muscle endurance. So even if the goal isn’t
necessarily to improve upon maximal strength (increasing your one-rep
max squat), there are still connections between maximal strength and
other abilities such as strength endurance. For example, if your one-rep
max squat increases, it’s likely that your five-rep max will too.
By definition, strength is the ability of a given muscle or muscle group
to generate force (Haff and Bompa 2009). While there are a number of
scenarios for strength to be manifested, the training methods presented
later in this chapter will help provide context around how strength is
developed, its classifications, and specific guidelines on how to develop
each type of strength. The exercises and training programs provided later
in this book will also include appropriate rep schemes that coincide with
these methods. Different strength methods all contribute to increasing
Strength
Agility
Endurance
Muscular Power
endurance
Maximal
strength
Aerobic
endurance
Maximal
Speed
Anaerobic speed
endurance
Speed
endurance
Figure 3.1 Interaction of biomotor abilities and various aspects of sports
performance.
E8335/Brown/F03.01/678308/mh-R2
Reprinted by permission from T. Bompa and C.A. Buzzichelli, Periodization: Theory and
Methodology of Training, 6th ed. (Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics, 2019), 231.
--- PAGE 39 ---
Go Beyond the Basics 23
strength qualities, but establishing a baseline level of maximal strength
(assuming you have built efficient movement patterns with a given
lift) will ensure that all qualities are increasing commensurately. Each
strength method has a specific intent and specific parameters that are
important when using a concurrent (training multiple biomotor abilities
within the same week of training) form of training.
Also, understanding the adaptations that take place from various
forms of strength training helps ensure that your training program will
promote balanced strength development. Maximal force or velocity of a
muscle or a muscle group can be expressed in other biomotor abilities
like speed and endurance. We hear many individuals say things like “I’m
not concerned with gaining maximal strength” simply because they are
not yet educated in the connection between maximal strength and nearly
every other biomotor ability.
Now that we’ve established that maximal strength plays a key role in
the strength development of other biomotor abilities, it is important for
you to understand its other advantages, which may not be obvious to
the untrained eye:
• Synergy of strength modalities. It’s important to know the
differences between strength training methods and how they blend
together in a successful training plan. With this in mind, this book
will use a variety of strength training measures that look to improve
different components of strength at different locations on the force-
velocity curve (maximal force versus maximal velocity). This allows
you to effectively create balance within a training plan and prevent
overtraining.
• Improvement of strength limitations. As Louie Simmons says,
“You’re only as strong as your weakest link.” This holds true with
developing lower body strength. A consistent attack on limitations
with a wide variety of special exercises will prevent weak links from
destabilizing your training and is instrumental to your lower body
training success (Simmons 2015). You cannot effectively build a
base of strength if you’re neglecting general strength measures (i.e.,
unilateral work, which not only allows you to consistently address
your limitations but sets up success with other modalities such as
maximal strength work).
• Avoiding accommodation or adapting to a repetitive stimulus.
The biological law of accommodation states that constant exposure
to the same stimulus results in detraining. In order to prevent
accommodation, exercise selection and volume prescriptions
should be adjusted regularly (Simmons 2015). We know the body
thrives on variability in order to continue to make progress, and
--- PAGE 40 ---
24 Lower Body Training
this variability will come by way of varying exercise selection while
still programming the essential foundational patterns of squatting,
lunging, and hip hinging.
• Improving motor-unit recruitment as it relates to strength
training. Maximal strength work has the ability to recruit and use
higher-threshold motor units.
In short, having a firm grasp on the methods and their overall goals will
be instrumental in creating better synergy, adaptations, and improvement
of limitations. It is clear that heavy lower body resistance training has
massive returns on investment with regard to improving maximal
strength, which has strong ties to performance, but understanding the
endocrinology of multijoint training is a key factor in creating an anabolic
environment in the human body. You need to make the connection that
growth can only occur in an optimal stress environment. Detraining
can also occur if you undergo doses of heavy resistance training that
are too high. For example, stress levels that are too high (by way of a
training session being too long in duration or simply using high-intensity
measures too frequently in one’s program design) can increase catabolic
hormones such as cortisol that may override anabolic hormones, thus
delaying positive training adaptations or eventually leading to central
fatigue. In short, how you manage stress within the training session
affects the success of your training; there is a fine line between too much
volume, intensity, or frequency and not enough stress to induce positive
training adaptations.
STRENGTH TRAINING METHODS
Now that we’ve examined the various qualities of strength training, we’ll
dive into the training methods, in order of importance. These methods
will be used in the programs provided in part III of the book. However,
with any training method comes a number of caveats. For instance, the
ME method is an incredibly effective method to build absolute strength,
but it may simply be out of alignment if you’re not advanced in terms of
training age, training history, and motor control with bilateral movements
such as the squat and deadlift. The old adage “one must learn to crawl
before one can walk” rings true with strength training, and the foundation
of strength training is built with “general strength” measures such as
unilateral exercises. The methods are therefore presented in the order
of which will have the largest effect on your current training state
fastest. Later in this book, we’ll highlight exercise variations and how
those variations are sequenced with a training plan specifically geared
at developing lower limb strength. Keep in mind that while this book is
--- PAGE 41 ---
Go Beyond the Basics 25
designed to improve your knowledge and understanding of optimal lower
body programming, the same logic, tenets, and methods can be applied
when programming for the upper body.
General Physical Preparedness Work
The term general physical preparedness (GPP) gets thrown around
quite a bit—many coaches claim that the goal of their program is to
develop GPP, yet many of these same coaches don’t use measures that
actually develop it. Throwing heavy deadlifts into a workout if you are
already lacking in the strength department won’t develop GPP and
will likely get you hurt. We are talking about building your foundation.
This is something that should take precedence in any programming—if
you cannot pull a sled or carry two heavy kettlebells without having to
rest excessively between sets, then higher-skill work like ME squats or
deadlifts isn’t a smart move. The Russians had a GPP plan for all of their
athletes called the “rule of three” that they employed for three years in
the early stages of training before specialization took place. Yup, you
read that right. Why is this relevant to your training programs? If the
Russians were smart enough to build their athletes’ foundations first,
then maybe this is something you should consider. More importantly, all
of the training goals expressed by most people (look better, feel better,
get stronger, have fun) can be addressed with GPP measures.
Improving maximal strength indirectly connects to qualities of
strength endurance, although the two strengths could not be further
from each other. Using measures like sled drags, we can effectively
improve aerobic capacity and oxidative qualities of the musculature of
the hips, hamstrings, and calves, as well as bridge the gap between ME
and DE training sessions. Think of the sled as an intermediary to improve
strength qualities with only a small cost on the nervous and muscular
systems due to the fact there is zero axial loading. Moreover, the sled
also will improve the oxidative quality of fast-twitch muscle fibers.
Fast-twitch type II muscle fibers have an aerobic as well as
anaerobic ability, which strengthens the connection between maximal
and submaximal strength development and strength endurance.
Unfortunately, sled work is less common and accessible at a commercial
gym, but times have changed and many folks are now investing in
their own home gyms. The sled is an expensive training tool that is the
difference maker between reasonable gains and exceptional gains—it
really is that powerful. The sled may be one of the most valuable training
tools we have available, and at less than 120 dollars it is cost-effective.
The sled is a mainstay in effective program design and can be used for
strengthening as well as restoration. In addition, we can effectively train
--- PAGE 42 ---
26 Lower Body Training
all three energy systems with the sled, and while this book is geared more
toward strength development than it is conditioning, it would be foolish
to not mention the benefits that the sled provides for both strength and
conditioning that are different from those of any other training modality.
One can perform both short and long intervals of work with this tool,
making it quite versatile. In the programs presented in part III of the
book, schemes will be presented for programming sled work optimally
and logically so it is building upon other modalities such as ME work.
Moreover, sled work is a great way to unload the body and expedite
recovery. And building upon our unilateral versus bilateral debate, the
sled in essence is a unilateral training modality where both legs and arms
work contralaterally, allowing you to continuously address asymmetries.
Additionally, because the arms and legs are working in a contralateral
fashion comparable to that of a normal walking gait, the sled can actually
improve the most basic human function of local motion.
GPP is a huge aspect of any successful strength and conditioning
program. Although GPP is often an afterthought and usually traded
for “sexier modalities” like squats or deadlifts, the use of tools like the
sled on a regular basis as well as high-volume band work to improve
connective tissue quality and strengthen tendons can be the catalyst for
longevity and consistency as far as strength and hypertrophy gains are
concerned. And while this work is prescribed more anecdotally, with no
peer-reviewed research to support its efficacy, it makes complete sense
given the physiology of how tendons work. The storage of kinetic energy
takes place in the series elastic component (SEC), the musculotendinous
unit within our tendons, which will also be addressed in parts II and III
where plyometrics are employed to improve explosive strength qualities.
The rapid nature of accommodating resistance (AR) band exercises
and the band’s ability to be executed with rapid movement can increase
the storage of kinetic energy within tendons (Potach and Chu 2016).
Therefore, the makeup of high-volume, rapid band exercises supports
the notion that tendon quality and stiffness can be improved in this
manner. In fact, Westside Barbell, the “strongest gym in the world” that
we discussed previously, relies heavily on higher-volume band exercises
such as leg curls and pushdowns to prevent soft-tissue injuries when
pushing loads with maximal weights. The good news is that this band
work can be done just about anywhere with a few inexpensive bands
on hand, making this option great for the home gym. Additionally, for
the amount of time that’s needed for this work on a daily basis (5 to 10
minutes), the return on investment is sizable.
To recap, building a base of fitness is done most effectively with
measures that would be considered “general” in nature, like single-joint
exercises performed in typical hypertrophy and strength endurance
--- PAGE 43 ---
Go Beyond the Basics 27
schemes or sled drag variations that provide a high volume of work with
little cost on the nervous and muscular systems. However, let’s not forget
that while incurring tissue breakdown and rebuilding is part of gaining
new muscle mass, there must be a way to bridge the gap and expedite
recovery—you’re only as good as your ability to recover between sessions.
This is best accomplished with tools such as a sled and bands, which
both provide unique benefits that go beyond strength qualities. So if
your training plan is going to be complete, modalities like sled drags and
high-volume band exercises are a must. These variations are included in
the training programs provided in part III.
Repeated Effort Method
The repeated effort method is a premier method of improving muscular
imbalance and muscular hypertrophy and providing rehabilitative or
prehabilitative work to ensure you’re constantly improving symmetry.
This work is done through single-joint exercises and isolation work to
target musculature limitations. It’s important to prioritize unilateral
assistance exercises because you can dedicate time to improving
limitations, and classic lifts such as the squat, press, and deadlift will
improve through establishing symmetry and strength in lagging muscle
groups. Because unilateral exercises are less demanding on the nervous
system, you are able to add volume and frequency with the overall
objective of improving deficiencies. The volume of assistance exercises
can be pushed to high levels and align with your training age and needs
quite well with less risk. Moreover, people often fail to take inventory of
where they struggle the most and experiment with exercises that will
potentially help improve their limiting factors. This is what assistance
exercises are for—to strategically improve limitations in a muscle or
muscle group that may be holding one back, or worse, increasing their risk
of injury in the future. A simple example of this is the glutes, which extend
the hips and abduct and externally rotate the legs. They are therefore
responsible for the finishing, hip extension–based portions of the squat
and deadlift. Performing exercises that duplicate these actions is key.
The Romanian deadlift (RDL) and the glute hip thrust are two excellent
choices to build glute strength around hip extension movements.
Of course, improving performance is important to many individuals,
but many people tend to have the primary goal of improving body
composition. Luckily, assistance exercise work can be instrumental in
helping add lean muscle mass because the 8- to 12-rep range will facilitate
muscular hypertrophy (also known as sarcoplasmic hypertrophy), which
is an increase in the volume of sarcoplasmic fluid in the muscle cell
with no actual increase in muscular strength—envision the “muscle
--- PAGE 44 ---
28 Lower Body Training
pump” you get after doing three sets of biceps curls (French 2016). In
this case, time under tension will be significantly higher than for your
max effort, and DE work as the objective is quite different in terms of
strength development. (Hypertrophy work prioritizes time under tension,
whereas DE work prioritizes bar velocity to improve RFD.) The ultimate
goal here is to improve and isolate lagging muscle groups, so single-joint
exercises like split squats, single-leg RDLs, and glute hip thrust variations
are pillars of effective lower body program design.
Benefits of Prioritizing
Assistance Exercises
The benefits of prioritizing assistance exercises (roughly 80 per-
cent of your training volume in a given session) are understated.
Of course, it’s much sexier to squat with a barbell than it is to split
squat with two dumbbells, but the latter allows you to execute higher
volumes of work with less chance of compensation and will carry
over to improve your squat numbers through improved motor-neuron
synchronization. The benefits of prioritization are the following:
Focuses Lagging Muscle Groups
In an effort to target where you may be lacking, we can add a high
volume of work without the risk of exacerbating compensation
patterns—this will carry over to bigger movements like squats
and deadlifts by improving muscle function and coordination with
other muscles.
Safely Creates Higher Volume Through Unilateral
Movements
It is much safer to push the volume of a unilateral movement like a
split squat than a bilateral movement like a back squat. Pushing the
volume on compound movements carries inherent risks of overuse
injury and creating compensation patterns—with heavy, high-rep
bilateral work, there will almost always be a breakdown in the chain
as fatigue sets in. This can exacerbate your current asymmetries
and set you up for injury instead of making actual improvements.
Increases the Time Under Tension
Unilateral work requires less skill and neural demand, so we can
increase loading and volume commensurately, thereby increasing
--- PAGE 45 ---
Go Beyond the Basics 29
time under tension. This leads to increasing muscular hypertro-
phy. Sarcoplasmic hypertrophy is a product of time under tension,
unlike maximal strength development, where time under tension
is much lower.
Improves Bilateral Movement Motor Control and
Performance
To improve bilateral movements like squats, pulls, and Olympic lifts,
you have to have a continuous focus on isolating the areas where you
are weakest. For many, something as simple as adding more direct
posterior chain work is all it takes to produce noticeable gains in
all of the previously mentioned lifts (glute hip thrusts, back raises,
and RDL variations) and is a great vehicle to improve lifts where
the posterior chain predominates, such as squats, deadlifts, and
even the Olympic lifts.
Reduces the Risk of Injury
Assistance exercise work can effectively reduce the risk of injury
as well as rehabilitate current injuries. Advanced individuals must
be constantly assessing where they may be most limited; other-
wise they risk eventually incurring a setback or even detraining
effects. Strategically isolating weak muscle groups with unilateral
exercises can bring someone back from injury as well as prevent
future injuries.
Maximal Effort Method
The ME method is considered the superior method of improving both
intramuscular and intermuscular coordination; the muscles and CNS
adapt only to the load placed upon them, and this method brings forth
the greatest strength gains (Zatsiorsky, Kraemer, and Fry 2021). With
that said, what is meant by “maximal” can span a number of scenarios,
making the ME method a polarizing topic to say the least. Is training
maximally done with multiple repetitions such as a two-, three-, or even
five-rep max? Or are we talking about simply loading the bar with as much
weight as one can move for one repetition? In this book, we are referring
to maximal tension with the heaviest load for one repetition. The ME
method here is lifting a maximal load for one repetition performed with
bilateral movements such as squat, deadlift, and press variations. These
variations are included in the training programs provided in part III.
--- PAGE 46 ---
30 Lower Body Training
The adaptations occur in both intermuscular and intramuscular
coordination—in essence improving both the ability of muscles to fire
in synchronicity with one another and motor patterns. The ME method
brings forth the greatest gains in maximal strength with the most amount
of motor units activated (Zatsiorsky, Kraemer, and Fry 2021) and has the
highest-intensity strength measure (maximum load/resistance for one
repetition) but lowest-volume bilateral training measure (intensity and
volume should not intersect with this method) (Simmons 2015).
As previously mentioned, there are connections between maximal
strength and other biomotor abilities like strength endurance, but we
must first consider if the ME method can fit into your training plan,
allowing you to arrive at optimal results and a favorable risk-versus-
reward ratio. Exercise variations should be rotated weekly to reduce
risk of injury and to identify variations that are anthropometrically most
suited to the individual. Also, individuals using this method should be
fully comfortable building to one-rep maximum with any foundational
movement pattern such as a box squat or a floor press. Another safety
note is that this method requires the use of a spotter every time.
While this method does come with a stigma of being dangerous and is
not recommended for beginner or even intermediate individuals, it’s only
dangerous if the individual has not learned how to properly perform the
big lifts. Not having learned proper motor patterns can be a detriment
with any method, but it’s certainly not prudent to imagine working with
maximal loads without the proper movement patterns enforced first.
However, there are certainly other methods that will be a better match
for novices.
Submaximal Effort Method
The submaximal effort method differs from the ME method in the
number of repetitions executed, not necessarily the level of effort. While
the ME method results in the highest levels of motor-unit recruitment,
the submaximal effort method still results in high levels of motor-unit
recruitment that correspond with the size principle—recruitment order is
determined by the load placed upon the body; as the relative load increases
across multiple repetitions, large motor units will be recruited (Zatsiorsky,
Kraemer, and Fry 2021). With that said, the adaptations with this method
will be different from those with the ME method; however, a key takeaway
is that this method is optimal for individuals who have less experience.
This is because the emphasis is on building motor patterns with more
exposure to lighter loads. Individuals will not typically be asked to go
to one-rep maximum if they are still learning how to move with a given
pattern. Performing a multiple-rep max with a bilateral movement such
--- PAGE 47 ---
Go Beyond the Basics 31
as a squat variation technically constitutes submaximal work—remember
that true ME work is trained with a maximum singular effort.
The adaptations for this method are intermuscular and intramuscular
coordination—in essence improving both the ability of muscles to fire
in synchronicity with one another and motor patterns. Also, time under
tension is higher and results in more hypertrophic adaptations. The
submaximal effort method presents moderate-intensity, moderate-volume
measure—it’s recommended that you do not attempt to ramp up to the
same degree one would expect with a method like the repeated effort
method. Exercise variations should be rotated every two to three weeks
to allow time to ingrain good motor patterns.
In short, the logic behind the submaximal effort method is twofold:
(1) improve motor patterns with bigger bilateral movements—this is
critical for newer individuals before attempting to progress to a method
such as the ME method; and (2) incur higher bouts of volume with bigger
lifts. Remember, you will still incur the largest volume with the repeated
effort method and smaller unilateral exercises, but that’s not to say that
including heavier multiple-rep maxes with bilateral movements does not
have a place in your training plan. You must be mindful of proper volume
prescriptions and how this method synergizes with other methods, which
will play out optimally in the programs in part III.
Dynamic Effort Method
The DE method is used not to increase maximal strength but only to
improve the RFD and explosive strength (Zatsiorsky, Kraemer, and Fry
2021). Working harder is often associated with making more gains in the
gym, but I’d urge you to consider working smarter. The different methods
introduced here will allow you to create a more well-rounded training
plan that covers all bases in terms of special strength development. The
DE method works with lighter loads and emphasizes bar velocity; only
working with submaximal or maximal loads does not offer the benefits
of dedicating time to work on bar velocity or power such as with the DE
method. Oftentimes people associate power training with the Olympic lifts,
and while there is certainly a power component to the Olympic lifts, for
many the Olympic lifts are not practical as they require years of experience
and coaching from a qualified coach. Instead, you can arrive at the same
improvements in RFD, in this case speed strength, by using the DE method
without having to learn the snatch or clean and jerk. Again, the focus is
on bar velocity against intermediate resistance, which will provide better
results than simply using ME or submaximal effort training alone.
The DE method is integral for improving RFD and explosive strength.
(We’ll learn more about explosive strength work via plyometrics in
--- PAGE 48 ---
32 Lower Body Training
parts II and III.) In fact, there are a number of peer-reviewed studies
that support the efficacy of speed training (DE training) in terms of
motor-unit recruitment, improving fast-twitch type II muscle fibers,
and improving the elastic abilities of muscles and tendons (Cormie,
McGuigan, and Newton 2011). Because of this, it is prudent to include
such training in a well-rounded training plan. Even if your goal is to
gain lean muscle mass, this method will provide a synergistic effect
when used with other methods such as the ME method. The volume in
the DE method is significantly higher than that of the ME method, so
together the two methods correspond with each other to optimize gains
in both speed strength and strength speed and to prevent overtraining.
On your DE training days, the inclusion of explosive strength work via
plyometrics allows you to add a vital component of improving RFD as
well as maintaining type II fibers, which is particularly beneficial to
aging individuals. In short, when methods like the ME and DE methods
are used in conjunction with each other in the same week of training,
it creates a symbiotic relationship between methods that, in essence,
oppose but blend well with one another. The DE and ME methods are
different but present similar demands on the CNS.
Furthermore, this method gives an advantage when trying to mimic the
specificity of a sport. For instance, American football plays last between
four and seven seconds, with 45 to 60 seconds of rest between plays.
You can easily replicate this pattern by using the box squat, performing
eight triples every 45 to 60 seconds. This trains the ability of the aerobic
system to replenish high-energy phosphates, which is critical for success
in a sport like American football; while this sport draws largely on the
anaerobic adenosine triphosphate–phosphocreatine (ATP-PC) system,
there is a component of replenishing ATP aerobically since the athlete
does not receive full recovery between efforts. Moreover, this work carries
over to other sports such as ice or field hockey or soccer where explosive
bursts of movement are needed. In this case, the demands can be aligned
with the time domains of each sport allowing an athlete to effectively
train specificity that will have a real-world carryover to their sport.
The adaptations for this method are intermuscular and intramuscular
coordination, in essence improving both the ability of muscles to fire
in synchronicity with one another and motor patterns. The DE method
presents a high-intensity, moderate-volume measure—the focus is on bar
velocity and perfect technique, not maximal loading. Exercise variations
should be rotated every three weeks to allow for time to ingrain good
motor patterns and increase loading each subsequent week. Furthermore,
the DE method will help maintain type II fibers that deteriorate with
age (Potach and Chu 2016). Lastly, to fully reap the benefits of the DE
method, using AR is recommended. Even if you are not an athlete or do
not care about becoming more explosive, the DE method has a place
--- PAGE 49 ---
Go Beyond the Basics 33
within your program. Again, the adaptations are different from those of
the other methods, which creates favorable circumstances.
Explosive Strength
While jumping is an integral part of improving explosive strength for
athletics, it has value in terms of physiology and type II muscle fibers
Optimal Volume Prescriptions
for Training Methods
This chapter would not be complete without discussing optimal
volume recommendations for all methods. The following table shows
optimal Olympic weightlifting rep ranges used for training. Known
as Prilepin’s Chart, it was created by A.S. Prilepin, a Soviet-era
sports scientist who reviewed the training journals of thousands
of weightlifting athletes. It is meant to portray the optimal number
of reps per set and total rep count (volume) for power training
required for the Olympic lifts (the snatch and the clean and jerk).
Approximate Optimal
Percent of number of number of
1RM repetitions reps Total range
40% 4-8 36 30-50
50% 3-6 30 18-30
60% 3-6 24 18-30
70% 3-6 18 12-24
80% 2-4 15 10-20
90+% 1-2 4-10 1-10
Adapted from Prilepin’s Chart, A.S. Prilepin.
This chart has stood the test of time, and I’ve used it extensively
over the last decade. Of course, a guide is just that, a guide, and
never one-size-fits-all, but this chart is a great starting point when
attempting to arrive at optimal volume with the ME, submaximal
effort, and DE methods.
--- PAGE 50 ---
34 Lower Body Training
even for people who simply want to look and feel better and hit new With these variations it would be easy to increase or decrease difficulty
personal records from time to time. For those who don’t have any interest based on individual needs by simply modifying the jump height or adding
in athletic competition or powerlifting, the question comes down to resistance, but if you are not comfortable jumping and landing, there are
determining proper volume prescriptions and plyometric variations. In other available options such as static isometrics that have carryover and
terms of programming for general fitness, performing 20 to 25 jumps training effects similar to those of dynamic plyometrics.
twice a week is more than sufficient to prime the sympathetic nervous
system prior to a training session or as a stand-alone movement for In short, you will find that it is advantageous to have many tools in your
explosive strength work. The benefits span beyond improving power toolbox as far as strength training is concerned, and simply working “hard”
and RFD because we know that type II fibers deteriorate as folks age— doesn’t mean results are guaranteed. Instead, it’s best to work smarter
plyometrics can be a powerful catalyst for maintaining those type II and understand the stress cycle the body goes through with the ebbs and
fibers, and the return on a small investment of time is significant (Potach flows of high-intensity training—this is a major reason why we’ve talked
and Chu 2016). about other measures (repeated effort method and GPP work) that act as
For athletes, on the other hand, plyometrics can certainly serve as a a bridge between your more demanding training sessions.
permanent fixture in multiple sessions each week in which programmed
volume is higher and the skill requisite of variations can be higher. (This ADDITIONAL TRAINING TOOLS
is not always the case because the basic variations are still vital.) Of
Training for strength is comparable to building a house where each
course, this would need to be specific to the individual based on their
tool has a very specific focus and role. Tools such as cluster sets,
training age, the bioenergetics of their chosen sport, and their training
accommodating resistance, reverse bands, sleds, barbells, kettlebells,
history (to include proper ability for jumping and landing mechanics).
dumbbells, or specialized machines all help an individual arrive at their
When used correctly, plyometric training has been shown to improve
desired result. Much like building a house, more tools in your toolbox
the production of muscle force and power, so not only will regular
will allow you to complete the task faster and more efficiently.
plyometric work help with the overall goal of body composition, but it
will also improve performance. Moreover, since we know the sympathetic
Cluster Sets
nervous system’s fight-or-flight response and post-activation potentiation
last roughly five to eight minutes, we can effectively use some form of
Using intraset rest or “clusters” is hardly a new concept. In fact, Olympic
plyometrics to serve as a proper warm-up tool and prime the CNS for a
lifters use clusters regularly, some without even knowing it. Cluster
maximal lift that requires high levels of motor-unit recruitment.
training allows for small bouts of rest (10 to 20 seconds) in between
Choosing variations doesn’t have to be overly complicated. A few
reps to provide recovery and avoid the movement deterioration that
variations that are low in skill requisite and impact are shown in table 3.1.
would normally occur during a straight set with appreciable loading. In
Supertraining, cluster training is categorized two ways: (1) extensive
clustering, which involves four to six repetitions at four- to six-rep max
Table 3.1 Lower-Skill and Low-Impact Plyometric Variations
with 10-second rest intervals between each cluster; and (2) intensive
Plyometric variation Sets Reps Rest clustering with four to six total reps performed one repetition at a time
at between 75 and 90 percent of one-rep max, with about 20 seconds of
Seated dynamic vertical 6 3 45-60 sec rest between repetitions (Verkhoshansky and Siff 2009). There is a place
jump
for both extensive and intensive clustering, and I’ve used both with great
success. For purposes of hypertrophy, where the intent is longer time
Seated dynamic box jump 6 3 45-60 sec
under tension, extensive clustering fits the bill and can be used with a
Dumbbell squat jump + box 6 2 60 sec myriad of movements that would normally cause high neural fatigue.
jump
Cluster sets work quite well when used for general strength purposes.
In part III of this book, I’ve applied cluster work in hypertrophy, strength,
Trap bar jump 5 4 60 sec
and athletic performance settings. Intermediate and even more advanced